Change 48
THE
FIGHTTORECLAIMAI
By Karen Hao 
ILLUSTRATION BY RICARDO SANTOSHow a small 
group of researchers at the margins built a movement to wrest the world’s most powerful emerging technology from Big Tech’s control.
49 Radical AI
Timnit Gebru never thought 
a scientific paper would cause 
her so much trouble. 
In 2020, as the co-lead 
of Google’s ethical AI team, 
Gebru had reached out to Emily Bender, a linguistics 
professor at the University of 
Washington, and asked to col-laborate on research about the troubling direction of artificial intelligence. Gebru wanted to 
identify the risks posed by large 
language models, one of the 
most stunning recent break-
throughs in AI research. The 
models are algorithms trained on staggering amounts of text. 
Under the right conditions, they 
can compose what look like 
convincing passages of prose.
For a few years, tech com-
panies had been racing to build 
bigger versions and integrate 
them into consumer products. 
Google, which invented the 
technique, was already using 
one to improve the relevance 
of search results. OpenAI announced the largest one, called GPT-3, in June 2020 
and licensed it exclusively to 
Microsoft a few months later.
Gebru worried about how 
fast the technology was being 
deployed. In the paper she 
wound up writing with Bender 
and five others, she detailed 
the possible dangers. The mod-
els were enormously costly to create—both environmentally 
(they require huge amounts 
of computational power) and 
financially; they were often 
trained on the toxic and abu-
sive language of the internet; 
and they’d come to dominate 
research in language AI, elbow-
ing out promising alternatives. T
Clockwise from  
top left:  Raphael Gontijo Lopes,  Deborah Raji,  Rediet Abebe,  Timnit Gebru,  Joy Buolamwini,  William Agnew.49
Change 50
Like other existing AI tech-
niques, the models don’t actu-
ally understand language. But 
because they can manipulate 
it to retrieve text-based infor-
mation for users or generate 
natural conversation, they can 
be packaged into products and 
services that make tech com-
panies lots of money.
That November, Gebru 
submitted the paper to a con-
ference. Soon after, Google 
executives asked her to retract 
it, and when she refused, they 
fired her. Two months later, 
they also fired her coauthor 
Margaret Mitchell, the other 
leader of the ethical AI team.
The dismantling of that team 
sparked one of the largest con-
troversies within the AI world in recent memory. Defenders 
of Google argued that the com-
pany has the right to supervise 
its own researchers. But for 
many others, it solidified fears 
about the degree of control that 
tech giants now have over the field. Big Tech is now the pri-
mary employer and funder of AI 
researchers, including, some-what ironically, many of those who assess its social impacts.
Among the world’s richest 
and most powerful companies, 
Google, Facebook, Amazon, 
Microsoft, and Apple have made AI core parts of their 
business. Advances over the 
last decade, particularly in an 
AI technique called deep learn-
ing, have allowed them to moni-tor users’ behavior; recommend 
news, information, and prod-
ucts to them; and most of all, 
target them with ads. Last year 
Google’s advertising apparatus 
generated over $140 billion in 
revenue. Facebook’s generated 
$84 billion.
The companies have 
invested heavily in the tech-
nology that has brought them 
such vast wealth. Google’s parent company, Alphabet, 
acquired the London-based AI 
lab DeepMind for $600 million in 2014 and spends hundreds 
of millions a year to support its 
research. Microsoft signed a $1 
billion deal with OpenAI in 2019 
for commercialization rights to 
its algorithms.
At the same time, tech giants 
have become large investors in 
university-based AI research, 
heavily influencing its scientific 
priorities. Over the years, more 
and more ambitious scientists 
have transitioned to working for 
tech giants full time or adopted 
a dual affiliation. From 2018 
to 2019, 58% of the most cited 
papers at the top two AI con-
ferences had at least one author 
affiliated with a tech giant, com-
pared with only 11% a decade 
earlier, according to a study by 
researchers in the Radical AI 
Network, a group that seeks to 
challenge power dynamics in AI.
The problem is that the 
corporate agenda for AI has 
focused on techniques with 
commercial potential, largely 
ignoring research that could 
help address challenges like 
economic inequality and cli-
mate change. In fact, it has 
made these challenges worse. 
The drive to automate tasks has 
cost jobs and led to the rise of 
tedious labor like data clean-
ing and content moderation. 
The push to create ever larger 
models has caused AI’s energy 
consumption to explode. Deep 
learning has also created a cul-
ture in which our data is con-stantly scraped, often without consent, to train products like 
facial recognition systems. And 
recommendation algorithms 
have exacerbated political 
polarization, while large lan-
guage models have failed to 
clean up misinformation. 
It’s this situation that Gebru 
and a growing movement of 
like-minded scholars want 
to change. Over the last five 
years, they’ve sought to shift 
the field’s priorities away from 
simply enriching tech compa-
nies, by expanding who gets boy’s club culture, she wrote, 
had already pushed talented 
women out of the field. It was 
also leading the entire com-
munity toward a dangerously 
narrow conception of artificial 
intelligence and its impact on the world.
Google had already deployed 
a computer-vision algorithm 
that classified Black people as 
gorillas, she noted. And the increasing sophistication of 
unmanned drones was putting 
the US military on a path toward 
lethal autonomous weapons. But 
there was no mention of these issues in Musk’s grand plan to 
stop AI from taking over the 
world in some theoretical future 
scenario. “We don’t have to proj-
ect into the future to see AI’s 
potential adverse effects, ” Gebru 
wrote. “It is already happening. ”
Gebru never published her 
reflection. But she realized that 
something needed to change. 
On January 28, 2016, she sent an email with the subject line 
“Hello from Timnit” to five 
other Black AI researchers. “I’ve 
always been sad by the lack of 
color in AI, ” she wrote. “But 
now I have seen 5 of you :) and 
thought that it would be cool if 
we started a black in AI group or at least know of each other. ”
The email prompted a dis-
cussion. What was it about 
being Black that informed their 
research? For Gebru, her work 
was very much a product of 
her identity; for others, it was 
not. But after meeting they 
agreed: If AI was going to play 
a bigger role in society, they 
needed more Black research-
ers. Otherwise, the field would 
produce weaker science—and 
its adverse consequences could 
get far worse.
A PROFIT-DRIVEN AGENDA
As Black in AI was just begin-
ning to coalesce, AI was hit-
ting its commercial stride. That 
year, 2016, tech giants spent an 
estimated $20 to $30 billion to participate in developing 
the technology. Their goal is 
not only to mitigate the harms 
caused by existing systems but 
to create a new, more equitable 
and democratic AI. 
“HELLO FROM TIMNIT”
In December 2015, Gebru sat 
down to pen an open letter. 
Halfway through her PhD at 
Stanford, she’d attended the 
Neural Information Processing 
Systems conference, the largest 
annual AI research gathering. Of 
the more than 3,700 researchers 
there, Gebru counted only five who were Black.
Once a small meeting about 
a niche academic subject, 
NeurIPS (as it’s now known) 
was quickly becoming the big-
gest annual AI job bonanza. 
The world’s wealthiest com-
panies were coming to show 
off demos, throw extravagant 
parties, and write hefty checks 
for the rarest people in Silicon 
Valley: skillful AI researchers.
That year Elon Musk 
arrived to announce the non-
profit venture OpenAI. He, Y Combinator’s then presi-
dent Sam Altman, and PayPal 
cofounder Peter Thiel had put 
up $1 billion to solve what they 
believed to be an existential 
problem: the prospect that a 
superintelligence could one day 
take over the world. Their solu-
tion: build an even better super-
intelligence. Of the 14 advisors 
or technical team members he anointed, 11 were white men.
While Musk was being lion-
ized, Gebru was dealing with 
humiliation and harassment. At 
a conference party, a group of 
drunk guys in Google Research 
T-shirts circled her and sub-
jected her to unwanted hugs, a 
kiss on the cheek, and a photo.
Gebru typed out a scath-
ing critique of what she had 
observed: the spectacle, the 
cult-like worship of AI celebri-
ties, and most of all, the over-
whelming homogeneity. This 
51 Radical AI
should be combined. The 
hybrid approach would make 
AI more efficient in its use of 
data and energy, and give it 
the knowledge and reasoning 
abilities of an expert as well 
as the capacity to update itself 
with new information. But com-
panies have little incentive to 
explore alternative approaches 
when the surest way to maxi-
mize their profits is to build 
ever bigger models. 
In their paper, Gebru and 
Bender alluded to a basic cost of 
this tendency to stick with deep 
learning: the more advanced AI 
systems we need are not being 
developed, and similar prob-
lems keep recurring. Facebook, 
for example, relies heavily on 
large language models for auto-
mated content moderation. But 
without really understanding 
the meaning behind text, those 
models often fail. They reg-
ularly take down innocuous 
posts while giving hate speech 
and misinformation a pass.
AI-based facial recogni-
tion systems suffer from the 
same issue. They’re trained on 
massive amounts of data but 
see only pixel patterns—they 
do not have a grasp of visual 
concepts like eyes, mouths, 
and noses. That can trip these 
systems up when they’re used 
on individuals with a differ-
ent skin tone from the people on developing the technology, 
according to the McKinsey 
Global Institute.
Heated by corporate 
investment, the field warped. 
Thousands more research-
ers began studying AI, but they mostly wanted to work 
on deep-learning algorithms, 
such as the ones behind large 
language models. “As a young 
PhD student who wants to get 
a job at a tech company, you 
realize that tech companies are 
all about deep learning, ” says 
Suresh Venkatasubramanian, 
a computer science professor 
who now serves at the White 
House Office of Science and 
Technology Policy. “So you shift 
all your research to deep learn-
ing. Then the next PhD student 
coming in looks around and says, 
‘Everyone’s doing deep learning. 
I should probably do it too. ’”
But deep learning isn’t the 
only technique in the field. 
Before its boom, there was a 
different AI approach known as 
symbolic reasoning. Whereas 
deep learning uses massive amounts of data to teach 
algorithms about meaningful 
relationships in information, 
symbolic reasoning focuses 
on explicitly encoding knowl-
edge and logic based on human 
expertise. 
Some researchers now 
believe those techniques organizing the workshop, Gebru 
approached Joy Buolamwini, 
an MIT Media Lab researcher who was studying commercial 
facial recognition systems for 
possible bias. Buolamwini had 
begun testing these systems 
after one failed to detect her 
own face unless she donned 
a white mask. She submitted 
her preliminary results to the 
workshop.
Deborah Raji, then an 
undergraduate researcher, was 
another early participant. Raji 
was appalled by the culture 
she’d observed at NeurIPS. The 
workshop became her respite. 
“To go from four or five days of 
that to a full day of people that 
look like me talking about suc-
ceeding in this space—it was 
such important encouragement 
for me, ” she says.
Buolamwini, Raji, and 
Gebru would go on to work 
together on a pair of ground-
breaking studies about dis-
criminatory computer-vision 
systems. Buolamwini and Gebru coauthored Gender 
Shades, which showed that 
the facial recognition systems 
sold by Microsoft, IBM, and 
Chinese tech giant Megvii had remarkably high fail-ure rates on Black women 
despite near-perfect perfor-
mance on white men. Raji 
and Buolamwini then collab-
orated on a follow-up called 
Actionable Auditing, which 
found the same to be true for 
Amazon’s Rekognition. In 
2020, Amazon would agree 
to a one-year moratorium on police sales of its product, in part because of that work.
At the very first Black in 
AI workshop, though, these 
successes were distant possi-
bilities. There was no agenda 
other than to build commu-
nity and produce research 
based on their sorely lacking 
perspectives. Many onlook-
ers didn’t understand why 
such a group needed to exist. they were shown during train-
ing. Nonetheless, Amazon and 
other companies have sold 
these systems to law enforce-
ment. In the US, they have 
caused three known cases of 
police jailing the wrong per-
son—all Black men—in the 
last year.
For years, many in the AI 
community largely acquiesced 
to Big Tech’s role in shaping 
the development and impact of 
these technologies. While some 
expressed discomfort with the 
corporate takeover, many more 
welcomed the industry’s deep 
well of funding. 
But as the shortcomings of 
today’s AI have become more 
evident—both its failure to 
solve social problems and the 
mounting examples that it can 
exacerbate them—faith in Big 
Tech has weakened. Google’s 
ousting of Gebru and Mitchell 
further stoked the discussion 
by revealing just how much 
companies will prioritize profit 
over self-policing.
In the immediate aftermath, 
over 2,600 Google employ-
ees and 4,300 others signed a 
petition denouncing Gebru’s 
dismissal as “unprecedented 
research censorship. ” Half a 
year later, research groups are 
still rejecting the company’s 
funding, researchers refuse to 
participate in its conference 
workshops, and employees are 
leaving in protest.
Unlike five years ago, 
when Gebru began raising 
these questions, there’s now 
a well-established movement 
questioning what AI should be 
and who it should serve. This 
isn’t a coincidence. It’s very 
much a product of Gebru’s own 
initiative, which began with 
the simple act of inviting more 
Black researchers into the field.
IT TAKES A CONFERENCE
In December 2017, the new 
Black in AI group hosted its first 
workshop at NeurIPS. While “WE DON’T HAVE TO PROJECT INTO 
THE FUTURE TO SEE A I’S POTENTIAL 
ADVERSE EFFECTS.”

Change 52
recognition, and Massachusetts 
now requires police to get a 
judge’s permission to use it. 
Both the US and the European 
Commission have proposed 
additional regulation.
“First we had to just be 
there, ” says Gebru. “And at 
some point, what Black in AI 
says starts to become import-
ant. And what all of these 
groups together say becomes 
important. You have to listen 
to us now. ”
FOLLOW THE MONEY
After Gebru and Mitchell’s fir-
ing, the field is grappling anew 
with an age-old question: Is it 
possible to change the status 
quo while working from within? 
Gebru still believes working 
with tech giants is the best way 
to identify the problems. But 
she also believes that corporate 
researchers need stronger legal 
protections. If they see risky 
practices, they should be able 
to publicly share their obser-
vations without jeopardizing 
their careers.
Then there’s the question 
of funding. Many researchers 
want more investment from 
the US government to support 
work that is critical of com-
mercial AI development and 
advances the public welfare. 
Last year, it committed a mea-
sly $1 billion to non-defense-
related AI research. The Biden 
administration is now asking 
Congress to invest an addi-
tional $180 billion in emerging 
technologies, with AI as a top priority.
Such funding could help 
people like Rediet Abebe, an 
assistant professor of computer 
science at the University of 
California, Berkeley. Abebe 
came into AI with ideas of using 
it to advance social equity. But 
when she started her PhD at 
Cornell, no one was focused 
on doing such research. 
In the fall of 2016, as a PhD 
student, she began a small Gebru remembers dismissive 
comments from some in the 
AI community. But for others, Black in AI pointed a new way forward.
This was true for William 
Agnew and Raphael Gontijo 
Lopes, both queer men con-
ducting research in com-puter science, who realized they could form a Queer in 
AI group. (Other groups that 
took shape include Latinx in AI, 
{Dis}Ability in AI, and Muslim 
in ML.) For Agnew, in partic-
ular, having such a commu-
nity felt like an urgent need. 
“It was hard to even imagine 
myself having a happy life, ” 
he says, reflecting on the lack 
of queer role models in the 
field. “There’s Turing, but he 
committed suicide. So that’s 
depressing. And the queer part 
of him is just ignored. ”
Not all affinity group mem-
bers see a connection between 
their identity and their research. 
Still, each group has established 
particular expertise. Black in 
AI has become the intellectual 
center for exposing algorith-
mic discrimination, critiquing 
surveillance, and developing 
data-efficient AI techniques. 
Queer in AI has become a 
center for contesting the ways 
algorithms infringe on people’s 
privacy and classify them into 
bounded categories by default.Venkatasubramanian and 
Gebru also helped create the 
Fairness, Accountability, and 
Transparency (FAccT) con-
ference to create a forum for 
research on the social and 
political implications of AI. 
Ideas and draft papers dis-cussed at NeurIPS affin-ity group workshops often 
become the basis for papers 
published at FAccT, which 
then showcases that research to broader audiences.
It was after Buolamwini 
presented at the first Black in AI workshop, for exam-ple, that FAccT published Gender Shades. Along with 
Actionable Auditing, it then 
fueled several major education 
and advocacy campaigns to 
limit government use of facial 
recognition. When Amazon 
attempted to undermine the 
legitimacy of Buolamwini’s and 
Raji’s research, dozens of AI 
researchers and civil society 
organizations banded together 
to defend them, foreshadowing 
what they would later do for 
Gebru. Those efforts eventu-
ally contributed to Amazon’s 
moratorium, which in May the 
company announced it would extend indefinitely.
The research also set off a 
cascade of regulation. More 
than a dozen cities have banned police use of facial Cornell reading group with a 
fellow graduate student to study 
topics like housing instability, 
health-care access, and inequal-
ity. She then embarked on a 
new project to see whether her 
computational skills could sup-
port efforts to alleviate poverty.
Eventually, she found 
the Poverty Tracker study, a 
detailed data set on the finan-
cial shocks—unexpected 
expenses like medical bills or parking tickets—experienced by more than 2,000 New York 
families. Over many conversa-
tions with the study’s authors, 
social workers, and nonprofits 
serving marginalized commu-
nities, she learned about their needs and told them how she could help. Abebe then devel-
oped a model that showed 
how the frequency and type 
of shocks affected a family’s 
economic status. 
Five years later, the project 
is still ongoing. She’s now col-
laborating with nonprofits to 
improve her model and work-
ing with policymakers through 
the California Policy Lab to 
use it as a tool for preventing 
homelessness. Her reading group has also since grown 
into a 2,000-person commu-
nity and is holding its inaugu-ral conference later this year. 
Abebe sees it as a way to 
incentivize more researchers 
to flip the norms of AI. While 
traditional computer science 
conferences emphasize advanc-
ing computational techniques 
for the sake of doing so, the 
new one will publish work that 
first seeks to deeply understand 
a social issue. The work is no 
less technical, but it builds the 
foundation for more socially 
meaningful AI to emerge. 
“These changes that we’re 
fighting for—it’s not just for 
marginalized groups, ” she says. 
“It’s actually for everyone. ” Q
Karen Hao is a senior 
editor for AI at MIT Technology Review.“THESE CHANGES THAT WE’RE 
FIGHTING FOR—I T’S NOT JUST FOR 
MARGINALIZED GROUPS.”

Copyright
of
MIT
Technology
Review
is
the
property
of
MIT
Technology
Review
and
its
content
may
not
be
copied
or
emailed
to
multiple
sites
or
posted
to
a
listserv
without
the
copyright
holder's
express
written
permission.
However,
users
may
print,
download,
or
email
articles
for
individual
use.

© 2008 SAGE Publications 10.1177/1474474007087500cultural geographies 2008 15: 231–253
Architecture of low-income widow
housing: ‘spatial opportunities’ in
Madipur, West Delhi
Ayona Datta
Department of Sociology, London School of Economics and 
Political Science
This article is based on a study of Madipur widow colony in west Delhi, built as part of the UN International
Year of Shelter for the Homeless in 1987. Designed to accommodate widows from squatter settlements in
Delhi, very few of the original houses now survive and very few of the original owners remain. The spatial
stories of the participants suggest how and why and under what circumstances a State’s visions of empowerment
as translated into utopian architectural projects are transformed by the people who inhabit them. They illustrate
how a particular set of ‘spatial opportunities’ built into the widow colony are manipulated and seized upon 
by the participants to produce an uneven geography of architecture and empowerment. This article thus extends
the important work on critical geographies of architecture to the architecture of low-income housing in the
global South.
architecture •development •empowerment •gender •housing
Introduction
1987 was an important year. The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (UNCHS)
declared this as the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. This was the year when
the first ever Indian National Housing Policy was drafted. This was also the year when Madipur
Widow Colony was conceived as a demonstration project for low-income widow housing in
Delhi. Claimed as a success of public-private collaboration and innovative financing,1this was
given the National Shelter Award for that year. Twenty years on, very few of the original houses
survive and very few of the original owners remain. Those who live here now have demol-
ished and rebuilt the original houses; they have appropriated available land; and they have trans-
formed the architecture in ways that have enabled new forms of empowerment.
This article illustrates how, why, and under what contexts development initiatives of the
State that are translated into utopian architecture/planning projects undergo transformations
in the hands of the users. Central to this article are the particular set of familial, social, and
architectural potentials for change – what I will call ‘spatial opportunities’ – that are seized
upon and manipulated by women to remake their spaces and themselves. I focus on women’s
empowerment not simply because Madipur widow colony was built for women, but to firmly
situate their experiences within the dominant discourses in global and national developmentKeywords:
232cultural geographies 15(2)
plans that use women’s empowerment as markers of ‘success’ or ‘failure’. Indeed as Raju2
suggests, women have often been defined as a ‘problem’ by various Indian plans, and women’s
issues are often written around (or under) the state’s desire to control female bodies. By
focussing on women’s narratives, I explore the critical role of architecture as a tool of the
State in transforming women’s gender relations, and subsequently as an embodied political
practice among women in transforming themselves. In this article, I ask how and under what
conditions architecture engages with civil society; how and under what conditions architec-
ture of low-income housing presents possibilities of transformation; and under what condi-
tions architecture becomes the terrain of political practice and empowerment.
Various United Nations developmental initiatives have seen the inclusion of women in
political and economic realms as key to their empowerment in the global South. Their archi-
tectural translation into housing in Madipur for particular gendered and classed subjects
underline not just the Indian State’s alignment with these goals, but also the role of archi-
tecture in international development. Yet, housing for the urban poor is seen not as an archi-
tectural issue, but as a development issue – the provision of basic services – electricity, water,
sewerage, and habitable space understood as the panacea for housing and empowering squat-
ters.3Housing projects such as Madipur widow colony are common in these contexts.4In
the 1980s, these were often designed by well-known Indian architects5on vernacular ideol-
ogies that made references to rural and pastoral nostalgia.6In the South, such utopian pro-
jects have recently come into sharp criticism by local practitioners and academics,7although
they are often awarded national and international accolades – a phenomenon which Verma8
describes as ‘emperor’s new clothes’.
Literature on feminist development9have argued that the ‘woman’ who the State and inter-
national agencies seek to empower is ‘irretrievably heterogeneous’, and that her empower-
ment is shaped not only by class, caste, and religion, but also other power structures within
households, neighbourhoods, and communities.10Mayaram11further suggests that neither the
State nor society can ‘empower’ women since both are permeated by androcentric interests
in these contexts. In other words, women’s empowerment cannot occur with the mere inclu-
sion of women, but through an alternative politics that imagines new ways of being.12Hence,
often State-sponsored empowerment approaches that claim to be ‘speaking out for’13those
women who they seek to empower do not address the lived realities of women’s lives. In
ways that he calls ‘seeing like the State’, Scott14proposes that State schemes to shape new
citizens and reorder their social worlds have failed because they have been based on sim-
plifying complex social realities. Indeed, Madipur widow colony has ‘failed’ to produce State-
imagined empowerment of self-sufficient widows; but its transformation in the hands of the
users suggest other politicized practices of empowerment and disempowerment, which I seek
to illustrate in this article. I suggest that the State’s social engineering models of empower-
ment as translated into low-income housing are also part of grassroots agency; and that their
subsequent transformations in the hands of the users should not be understood simply as
‘failure’ but as imaginative acts of social agency enacted through architecture.
Recent scholarship in human geography has made calls for a ‘critical geography of archi-
tecture’,15suggesting that the ‘built environment is shaped and given meaning through the
active and embodied practices through which it is produced, appropriated, and inhabited’.16
An increasing number of geographers have now moved beyond a reading of architecture
Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
233produced by architects, to examine the processes through which architecture becomes an
embodied performance of both architects and users. This is evident in the work of
Llewellyn17who suggests that we need to engage with the wide range of individuals who are
‘implicated in the process of designing and inhabiting the built forms produced’.18Llewellyn
calls this the ‘thick description of home’,19where architecture is understood as a productive
activity. Jacobs20suggests that this approach should also ‘effectively broach the question of
how a building comes to have a “presence”, how it is stitched into place by fragmented,
multi-scaled, and multi-sited networks of association’. This is effectively summed up by
Massey21in her theory of ‘power-geometry’, which suggests that particular places are con-
structed through the multiple and overlapping relations of power at different spatial scales,
and that different individuals are placed in very distinct ways within these relations. These
discussions provide the conceptual field from where I wish to extend the work on critical
geographies of architecture onto agency and empowerment.
While this recent interest in architecture among geographers has provided analyses of pub-
lic buildings, high-rises, and social housing in the North, domestic architectural geographies
of the poor in the South remain largely unexplored. A critical geography of architecture has
not yet reached the spaces of the urban poor in the South, although it can be argued that
the user transformations in Madipur widow colony are forms of ‘vernacular’ architecture that
are indigenous to time and place, and adapted to local needs and resources. By studying
Madipur widow housing, I extend geographical scholarship on architecture to low-income
housing in the global South; I extend critical geography’s engagement with ‘big things’ of the
global high-rise22to the ‘small things’ of poor widow houses; and I extend its realm to an
architecture that is produced in a global developmental context. I suggest that it is import-
ant to examine low-income housing for the opportunities it presents for politicized practices,
to examine its architecture for the ways that it is produced by multi-scalar actors, for the
ways its architecture becomes the terrain of interrogation and re-inscription, and to chart out
the processes through which the everyday ‘tactics’23of creating liveable places are tied to 
particular forms of empowerment.
These connections between agency and architecture have been under-researched in femi-
nist geography. Feminist geographers have illustrated that social action is deeply embedded
in particular places,24and that agency should be understood not just as resistance to domi-
nant forms of power but also as everyday practices of embodied political action, that pro-
duce particular kinds of places.25Massey suggests that it is this aspect of agency that make
places and spaces part of the ‘practice of interrelation’26which are continuously shifting and
multiplying. If architecture is the site of active and embodied spatial practice, then like space,
architecture too is tied up with the ‘entanglements of power’27that shape and are shaped by
productive acts of agency. I suggest therefore, that the transformation of Madipur widow
housing by its residents illustrates how architecture can become a dynamic terrain of agency,
the medium through which social relationships are practised and transformed.
These discussions lead me to the key idea in this article, that of ‘spatial opportunities’ – a
particular set of social, cultural, political, familial, and material possibilities of change that are
embedded in and made possible through architecture. I use the word ‘spatial’ to suggest that
these possibilities of change include both material and social realities that are transformed
through architecture. I use the word ‘opportunities’ to suggest that spatial contingencies are
234cultural geographies 15(2)
available to different users on account of their specific locations within different power struc-
tures. Hence transformations of the self and of architecture are only possible through sub-
jects’ respective relationships with power; which indicates why ‘empowerment’ is not evenly
distributed among the residents of Madipur widow colony. It is this unevenness of empower-
ment experienced through spatial opportunities, which I examine through the ‘spatial stories’
of five women.
Methodology
In 1994, I visited Madipur widow colony as part of a college project. At that time, most houses
lay vacant, and the appearance of the colony generally reflected that of the original plan. In
2002, as part of a research project examining the connections between gender, space, and
power, I approached the widow housing again. This time, I found it difficult to locate since it
had completely changed in appearance, integrating with the neighbouring resettlement colonies
through commercial and retail streets. My observation that not all houses had changed or
expanded in the same way, while some of the residents had become much better off than
others, was the inspiration for this article, which is based on the detailed research in 2002.
In this study, I have used a mixed method of architectural mapping and semi-structured
interviewing. Architectural mapping was used to record physical changes in the houses. This
involved walking around the colony with the architects’ drawings, and recording on them cur-
rent building use (domestic, work, or mixed), demolitions, new constructions, heights,
encroachments, and so on. This was supplemented with photographic evidence. Since it is
clear that the changes are a continuous process, and building activity within the colony a per-
manent feature, the architectural mapping in 2002 is intended to provide a snapshot of trans-
formations at a particular time in a particular social context.
Semi-structured interviews were conducted in Hindi with 18 residents (of which four were
men) to understand the reasons why many beneficiaries did not move into the colony while
others moved in, changes they made to the units and why, perceptions of their colony, and
so on. The interviews were later translated and transcribed to English by the author. Only
two of the participants were original allottees. The rest were mainly from lower middle-class
families working as government employees in clerical grades, or engaged in small businesses
and retail activities in the city.
The combination of interviewing and architectural mapping was intended to understand and
locate participants’ accounts within actual physical evidence of change, as well as to understand
physical changes in their units through participants’ familial and social contexts. The main object-
ive was to understand how and why and under what circumstances changes had occurred in
the houses, and how participants understood these changes. It has to be kept in mind though,
that there is a dearth of information on this project in official documents. Often it is only
mentioned in passing, and always as a ‘success’ story. Therefore, a lot of the information has
been pieced together from various informal accounts by residents and architects.
Background information and drawings in this study were provided by HUDCO who
designed this project. The architects who had been in charge of this project, however, had
left the organization; hence no one could answer my questions about the design concept.
Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
235The analysis of the design therefore reflects the UN description, residents’ critiques of the
design, as well as my own readings. The housing cooperative refused to participate (and
threatened me with physical harm when I approached them) since they were going through
litigation with the residents.
In the next section, I provide a brief contextualization of Madipur widow colony within
the geography of squatter settlements and resettlement colonies in Delhi. After this, through
the spatial stories of five women, I discuss how particular spatial opportunities enabled them
to empower themselves in different ways.
Geography of squatter settlements and resettlement 
colonies in Delhi
At the time of independence in 1947, with the launching of a national planning process in
India, the public sector was visualized as having a crucial role as the provider of low-income
housing.28This was delivered through national Five-Year Plans, which regulated most urban
development in Delhi till 1957, when the Delhi Development Authority (DDA) was consti-
tuted. Soon, experts from DDA and Ford Foundation worked to produce the first ever
Masterplan for Delhi (1962–1981) – their aim was to remove ‘surplus population’ to a series
of ‘satellite towns’ around Delhi. DDA and Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) also
shared the responsibility of slum clearance, and the DDA became the single planning author-
ity responsible for the development and disposal of land in the capital.
Along with the Slum Areas (Clearance and Improvement) Act in 1956, the first Masterplan
had made provisions for the resettlement and upgrading of squatter settlements. During
1961–1977, the DDA developed 47 resettlement colonies of 200,000 plots accommodating
about 240,000 households on the fringes of the city. The plot sizes allocated to resettled
households were 80 sqm, with provision for attached toilets. In 1962, the plot sizes decreased
to 40 sqm. During 1975–1977, this came further down to 21 sqm.29
In the 1980s the larger resettlement colonies were concentrated in the north-western fringes
of the city and east of the river Yamuna – areas which were primarily industrial (see Figure 1).
These were also far from the city centre, and the high-income neighbourhoods in South Delhi,
from where the squatters were relocated.31It is in this north-western part of the city in Madipur,
that a number of resettlement colonies were established and later, the widow colony was
located. In total, this area accommodated 21,610 persons within 22.5 hectares in 4322 plots
varying in sizes between 21 and 31 sqm. Although constituting a large portion of resettled
households, women were not explicitly mentioned as target beneficiaries of these schemes.
It has been argued that one of the reasons behind the rapid growth of squatter settle-
ments in Delhi since the 1970s is due to the Masterplan.32During this period, DDA built
only 50 per cent of planned low-income housing units, which increased pressures on afford-
able housing.33By 1982, more than 62 per cent of Delhi’s population were living in various
forms of informal housing34across the city – along roads, river banks, railway tracks, parks,
and other public or private land. In 1983, the taskforce on Housing and Urban Development
published by the Central Government35was critical of the resettlement schemes not to have
considered other equally important aspects of housing – tenure and landuse. The second
236cultural geographies 15(2)
Masterplan (1982–2001) therefore promised resettlement to around 49,000 squatter house-
holds, with provisions of income earning opportunities within or in proximity of resettle-
ment colonies. Madipur widow colony was part of this phase of Delhi’s urban development.
Around that time, the UN General Assembly expressed serious concern that, ‘despite the
efforts of governments at the national and local levels and of international organizations, the
living conditions of the majority of people in the slums and squatter areas and rural settle-
ments, especially in developing countries continue to deteriorate in both relative and absolute
terms’.36Thus, 1987 was proclaimed as the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless.
Its specific focus was on those living in slums in ‘developing countries’. Following this, the
‘United Nations Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000’ (GSS) called for the crucial
role of women and women’s organizations in solving the crisis of adequate housing to be
fully recognized. In line with the inclusion of women in other development programmes, it
argued that women should have equal participation in all aspects of the housing initiative,
which should utilise the resources of all governmental and non-governmental actors in the
field of human settlements37to their full potential.
In 1988, the first National Housing Policy38(NHP) of India aimed to provide a ‘prescrip-
tion in tune with global concerns’, describing itself as a ‘war against human indignity’, and laid
down legal and regulatory reforms to speed up the process of housing construction. The State’s
role in the NHP , however, was to be an enabler which meant that housing for the poor wasFIGURE 1 Map of Delhi showing the geography of resettlement colonies in the 1980s.30

Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
237to be delivered through ‘public-private partnerships’. The Seventh Five-Year Plan (1985–1990)
therefore earmarked an amount of Rs 20 million for a project entitled ‘International Year of
Shelter for the Homeless and International Cooperation’.39In 1985, a special housing scheme
was launched for squatters where a group housing society comprising of widow registrants were
allocated land at Madipur.40Although the Indian State had made concerted efforts in the past
to legitimize women’s entry into the economic, legal, and political spheres,41and the DDA had
made 1–2 per cent reservation for War-Widows in some of its low-income housing schemes,42
this was the first time that widows were mentioned as beneficiaries in a housing policy, and a
colony was conceived exclusively for them.
In 1988, the Ministry of Urban Development advertised in the local newspapers about
Madipur widow housing. Officers from the Slum Wing contacted potential beneficiaries in Sadar
Bazaar, a designated slum area close to Old Delhi which was being resettled at the time.43The
units were then allocated through lottery. Each beneficiary was given a 20 years subsidised mort-
gage to pay back the costs, which were transferred to a private cooperative society.44The Society
was responsible for collecting the mortgage payments. In 2001, Madipur Widow Colony was
described by UN Habitat as an ‘International Year of Shelter for the Homeless initiative to
demonstrate a new approach to human settlement problems, one appropriate to the life-style
of the people’.45It received the National Shelter Award in India soon afterwards.
Design and planning
This is how the UN described the design concept:
Within Indian culture, communities had to live closely together in viable clusters with common social and cultural
identities and similar economic goals. This tradition was borne in mind during the design phase of the project,
so it was decided to develop clusters of condominium units built around a private area for community use.46
Madipur widow colony was designed by in-house architects at HUDCO (instead of DDA
as is common for resettlement schemes). In its site planning, the architects used lower dens-
ities (161 units/hectare) to provide courtyards, a feature uncommon in resettlement colonies
(with densities of around 200 units/hectare). The size of the site itself at 1.63 hectares, was
also smaller than other resettlement colonies (which were usually around 5 hectares) in order
to generate a smaller close-knit community. The overall planning was based on a system of
courtyards with rear pedestrian lanes, different from the intersecting linear streets common in
Delhi’s other resettlement colonies. The amount of space (20sqm) in each plot was in keep-
ing with other colonies. Each unit consisted of a multipurpose room, bathroom, and toilet
on the ground floor47and a provision for expansion on the first floor, reflecting an ‘incre-
mental housing’48concept. The houses were built with ‘low-cost’ technologies – low grade
cement, wooden planks for doors, and brick latticework for windows. On the site, there was
also land allocated for a community hall and a market, where shops were to be made avail-
able to the widows for purchase later. The site planning relied on a strict separation between
working and living spaces and a uniformity of dwelling sizes, designs, and courtyards. Since
the site itself was not orthogonal, the orthogonal shape of the courtyards meant that there
were triangular areas left out along the edges of the site.
238cultural geographies 15(2)
The conceptualization and design of this community were based on the notion of an
alternative domesticity that gave precedence to women occupying particular gender and class
positions. The presence of courtyards and a community hall reflected the fusion of public
and private realms into a community realm; something that might be expected of elderly
widows who could provide support to each other. The visual transparency of the brick lat-
ticework (instead of shuttered windows) and the one-room dwelling was based on a resident
who was single, and did not desire privacy. The external access to the toilet reflected a con-
fidence both in the secure boundaries of this colony and in the lack of threat that the resi-
dents in this colony might pose to one another. The ‘incremental housing’ reflected an
expectation of a subject who would be able to generate enough economic capital to add
another floor over time. These approaches can be read as attempts to produce a gendered
subject; an urban citizen who posed no threat to urbanity (as single ‘destitute’ widows). These
can also be read as part of the politics of humanitarian endeavours of the State in assuring
international development agencies of India’s alignment with global housing concerns.
Madipur widow housing was described as a project where ‘The communities … were
involved in the schemes right from the beginning in all important decision-making during
planning, designing and implementation. Post-occupancy management … is vested with the
women. The success … has led to considerable interest in its replication in other parts of
the country.’49However, as the houses were allocated many widows did not move in. OthersFIGURE 2 Original site plan of the widow colony. (Source: HUDCO, 1995.)

Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
239sold their houses. In the years after allotment, the units changed hands rapidly in the open
market.
There were various reasons which contributed to this. First, in 1987, the location of the
widow colony on the fringes of West Delhi made it difficult for the widows to imagine its
future potential. However, as the city expanded, Madipur’s location near the national highway
meant that over time it became incorporated within the city. House prices increased and the
widows found it easier to sell their units and make a profit. As Simi (a tenant in the colony)
explained:
There used to be buffaloes here; and there was a small pond where they used to laze about in. So there used to
be nothing in this colony. Really! And that time the rate [cost] was 34,000 rupees and I asked my aunt [who was
a widow] to take a plot here. And she said I am not taking it because this place is not developed. And now look
at this.
Second, the location of the widow colony made it difficult to access basic facilities such as
grocery stores and public transport at that time. Third, community services such as the hall
and market had not been built. These issues were clear in Kanta’s narrative:
FIGURE 3 Original plan of the courtyard.50The numbers denote units. Note how the location of
units 8 and 9 allow possibilities of expansion onto the gap. (Source: HUDCO, 1995.)
240cultural geographies 15(2)
The bus-stand should have been close; the milk-booth should have been close, the vegetable market should have
been close. She [chairperson of the cooperative society] said they will have a market here but they didn’t build
it. They said they would build a hall for weddings but that land is lying empty. No proper latrine, no proper bath-
room. The bathroom doesn’t even have a door. There is no facility for widows over here.
While the widow colony had been built for single widows, it was clear that they were also
part of extended households – many had relatives, young children, or even married sons liv-
ing with them, which meant that the single multipurpose room was inadequate for their needs.
The widows needed a substantial amount of money to make these essential changes before
moving in, as Kanta said:
We didn’t know what they were making us sign to. I am illiterate. I just signed on what they asked us to sign on.
I saw the plan and I thought very good, we have got it in a very nice place. Then when we came here, I saw
this place and started crying. That’s why I kept this locked for three years. I kept thinking, where would we get
so much money from.
Finally, those who did move in found that their lease had various clauses – prohibition
on renting out or working from units, allowing relatives to stay, and prohibition on children
inheriting the unit. Within a few years, many widows sold their units to ‘outsiders’ who came
because of its location close to major roads, because of its changing demographic profile,
but also because of its design. The new owners were from nearby resettlement colonies in
Madipur, Mangolpuri, and Nangloi, who had become socially mobile, and desired ‘nicer’
places to live in. As Wajid, a ‘new’ resident explained:
I like it because it’s not congested. The neighbourhood is alright because there are middle-class people living here.
There is no fear, because there are no robberies, or crime, or anything. Because the houses have been made in
the form of a square, there is only one way to enter. The best thing is that in summers we can open both doors.51
We had looked at many other [resettlement] colonies, but we liked this best.
The cooperative society, concerned at the rapid change of hands, tried to control this by
asking that the widows come in person for the payment of instalments. In 2000, the society
FIGURE 4 Some of the old houses lying unoccupied. (Photo: Author, 2002.)
Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
241resorted to the cutting-off of water and electric supply to the Colony. Although these were
later reinstated, the residents started legal proceedings against the Society. Among other
things, they demanded the removal of the ‘unfair’ clauses on the lease and the acceptance of
the new owners as ‘legal’ residents, who were ready to pay the remainder of the mortgage
to the society. The case has been continuing since then.
Transformations
The transformation of the low-income widow colony occurred over the years through erasures
and inscriptions. The erasures of the gendered subject were evident in the demolition of most
of the old houses. The inscriptions on the other hand were multiple and varied. By demolish-
ing the old house the new owners were not consciously erasing a ‘low-income widow colony’.
Rather they were making an uncoordinated effort at creating places suited to their needs.
As evident from Figure 5, the houses along the main roads expanded over the years to fill
in the ‘gaps’ on the triangular edges of the site. Many also changed use into grocery stores,
restaurants, furniture stores, tailoring, beauty parlours, and so on, transforming the boundary
into a zone of retail and commercial activities. Towards the rear, the owners built rooms to
rent out. For those houses without adjacent open space, the owners covered the front and
FIGURE 5 Changes in use and heights of houses. (Recorded by Author, October 2002.)
242cultural geographies 15(2)
back porches, and expanded vertically. Despite the erasure of the widow houses and the
inscription of new kinds of family houses in its place, the courtyards and the central open
space did not undergo any encroachment. As the houses became more private, the courtyard
became part of the community realm; a place of socialization and entrepreneurship.
In redesigning the houses, the residents were manipulating the spatial opportunities avail-
able to them. They were choosing which aspects of the design of units were valid, which
changes were suitable for their families, and how much economic capital they could invest.
While the old houses translated communitarianism into a ‘porous’ dwelling, the new owners
began the process of asserting the importance of privacy and security by inserting shuttered
windows, grilles, and steel doors. While the old houses had relied upon single occupancy, the
new owners added areas that established the importance of a patriarchal family through sep-
arate living room and bedrooms, separate kitchen, and internal bathrooms. In contrast to the
‘low-technology’ construction of the original houses, the new houses were built of stronger
materials – concrete floor slabs, and solid wooden doors with steel grills. Unlike the single-
storey structures of the old houses, the new houses were two- or three-storeys high and
sometimes combined two or three adjacent houses. Hence, some houses were now larger and
more elaborate than those intended in the original design. For example, the chairperson of
the residents’ association (identified in Figure 5) who had bought two houses next to each
other also encroached on the triangular empty land next to them. His house became the
largest in the colony; the only one to be gated, with a ‘private’ garden. In appropriating,
demolishing, and transforming the physical landscape of the colony, the residents produced
their own architecture, one that was very different from the architects’, State’s, and UN’s
vision of low-income widow housing.
Spatial stories
In this section, I will discuss the ‘spatial stories’ of a few women living in the widow colony
to illustrate how their spatial opportunities allowed them to exercise their agency in making
architectural transformations, and how the new architecture then became the site and medium
through which they empowered themselves.
Sharda
Sharda, a widow in her 50s, was one of the original allottees of the colony. Since her hus-
band died, Sharda had worked as a sweeper in a government office.
The slum officers made us fill up the form because we were without support. They said that we were not mem-
bers, we were owners.52Then they made us fill up the forms for the superbazaar [market] so we get that. But
we didn’t get that. Why not? My children were young and I am illiterate, what do I understand?
Sharda had come to live in the colony only one and half years before this study. Till then
her elder son had lived there. Once he started making enough money, he made essential
improvements for Sharda to move in with her daughters. Sharda’s house, however, was in the
middle of the courtyard layout. This meant that unlike other residents who had built on the
Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
243adjacent empty land, Sharda was limited in the ways that she could increase the size of her
house.
See how much park he [chairperson] has. Now tell me, does he have an advantage or do I have an advantage? Why
is it like this? Now where do I go and build? They have all covered their spaces53outside. See how much space
they had. Now they have built shops there. Now tell me what do I have here? I want to ask them [DDA] what are
you doing for widows? How are you helping them? If they had given me some more space, I could have started
my corner shop and made a living here. I am from UP54so I am very honest. Many people tell me to sell this off.
I say, why should I sell this? This is my house, and I got it from the government. This land was sponsored by inter-
national organizations to help those without support, but now they are making money out of it.
Sharda’s narratives can be interpreted as a form of gendered consciousness of her eth-
nicity, family circumstances, social capital (education), and architectural possibilities of change
that produced a particular set of ‘spatial opportunities’. Her understanding of the differences
between herself and some of the other residents were based on their increased spatial oppor-
tunities. For example, the chairperson of the resident’s association was a clerical grade gov-
ernment employee, his house occupied a strategic place in the colony, was made of expensive
materials, and he was able to manipulate law enforcement agencies despite his ‘illegal’
encroachments. Being from a conservative Hindu family in UP , Sharda’s daughters were not
allowed to work outside, but a larger house would have allowed them to work from home.
Sharda, however, expanded her house vertically. She had built two small rooms on the
upper floor – one for her son, and the other, she rented out to another family. Downstairs,
there was a larger multipurpose room with a kitchen where Sharda and her two daughters
FIGURE 6 Sharda’s two-storied house with steel-framed windows and doors. (Photo: Author, 2002.)
244cultural geographies 15(2)
lived. Sharda’s house was made with modest materials. Her rooms were whitewashed and she
did not have much furniture. Visitors sat on her bed. Outside, she had plastered and painted
the brick walls and installed steel doors and windows for privacy and security. The modest
architecture – the size, external appearance, and layout of the house – presented her as a
person of modest means. Sharda was not able to change the location of her house within
the colony; she did not have the money to demolish and rebuild it; but, she did what was
possible – extend it vertically and generate rental income from that extra space.
Sharda’s ‘empowerment’ was shaped by a number of factors. First, her gendered position
as a working-class widow was able to ensure her participation in a State-sponsored housing
project aimed at women’s empowerment. Sharda’s access to empowerment was limited in that
the location of her house was not near empty land, an issue that created tremendous spatial
inequalities within the widow colony. Yet, much of her ‘empowerment’ also depended on her
having an earning son, who was able to invest in the house, and make it liveable. Thus,
Sharda’s claims to spatial opportunities were not only contingent upon her having access to
architectural possibilities of change but also her position within a variety of other power rela-
tionships – with the State, family, class, ethnicity, and social capital. This is elaborated fur-
ther in Anita’s story.
Anita
Anita lived on the boundary of the colony along the main road. Anita, her husband, her two
children, her mother-in-law, and brother-in-law had moved there from Sadar Bazaar when the
unit was allotted to her widowed mother-in-law. This is how Anita described the changes:
The house has changed. The bricks were very yellow and weak. So we had to break it all and make it again. And
everyone built this together so there was a change [in the colony]. The houses are more solid, so we don’t have
problems with that. Otherwise the roofs used to be leaking before, and the floors had termites through them.
Then we had to put solid flooring so that the insects don’t come through. It took about four, five years total to
get it done.
It was significant then that this house was adjacent to the triangular land near the road.
Both her husband and his brother had pooled in their earnings, and like other owners along
the edge, they had extended their house till the main road. This doubled the size of the orig-
inal unit. The house now had four rooms on two floors with wide balconies facing the road.
As Anita said:
There was no benefit for the widows in here. This was only one room without a kitchen or anything. Although
there was a latrine bathroom, there was not enough space. There were three feet on either side and so we all
covered that and made two small rooms out of that.55That’s why we got two rooms made so that one room
will be for our mother-in-law and one for us. Because you can’t sleep in the same room with your children.
When she had arrived in the colony Anita had sat at home ‘not doing anything’ until her
husband encouraged her to start a shop. Initially, she sold small items but the location of
her house on the main road allowed her to expand her business. The front room facing the
road was made larger and turned into a grocery store where Anita employed a young man
to help her. During the study, Anita was regularly supplying groceries to many families within
Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
245and outside the colony. The store had expanded and announced itself with bold signage.
Anita said that since she had started the shop, she and her husband had stopped fighting,
because ‘now I am independent and doing my own work, I am proud of it. I don’t have to
listen to anyone’.
Anita’s peculiar relationship with the State through her extended family allowed her access
to material and social possibilities of change. Her ‘empowerment’ could not have been real-
ized had she not been part of her mother-in-law’s household, or their house had not been
on the boundary of the site. The State sponsored widow colony had, however, reproduced
the relations of gendered power within families by making Anita’s transformation subject to
her husband’s contribution on economic and moral terrains. Nevertheless, her narrative sug-
gests that although a larger house or economic productivity are not markers of empower-
ment in themselves, the independence and higher status within her family and wider society
that it represents, can become the route to empowerment.56Her transformation was an
embodied practice of material and social changes to the house and household relationships,
through which her spaces of social empowerment and economic productivity had fused.
Thus, the differences in the nature of empowerment between Sharda and Anita reflect their
locations within the intersections of architectural, familial, and economic opportunities, and
which set of spatial opportunities they were able to take up at any given time.
Shanta
Shanta was another original allottee of the colony. At the time of allocation she had been a
widow with a young daughter and son and did not have the money to invest in the house.
Shanta had worked as a seamstress till her son started earning and made improvements to
the house. ‘I used to do sewing and brought him [son] up. Then when he started earning
then I gave it up. Now I don’t do anything. My son has kept me very happy’, she said. It
was clear that while Shanta was the symbolic head of the household, she also considered her
FIGURE 7 Anita’s house with the grocery store on the ground floor. (Photo: Author, 2002.)
246cultural geographies 15(2)
well-being as the responsibility of a patriarchal family. Shanta perceived her empowerment
through legal markers, which provided her access to power within her household. The house
stood for Shanta’s higher social position within her family. ‘I told my son that as long as 
I am alive I won’t let you sell this house, because it’s in my name’, she explained.
Like Sharda’s house, Shanta’s house too was located in the middle of the courtyard mod-
ule; hence there was no scope for horizontal expansion. Nevertheless, her son had demolished
and completely rebuilt the house, covered the front and back porches, and built balconies on
either side. Unlike Sharda’s house, Shanta’s house was neatly divided into private and public
zones. The ground floor now had a separate kitchen, bathroom, and a living room. There
were two bedrooms on the first floor, one for herself and the other for her son’s family.
Visitors were made to sit on the sofas in the living room, while her daughter-in-law prepared
tea for them in the new kitchen. Shanta also was the only one in the courtyard to have a tele-
phone, a precious commodity in the colony. This meant that she could decide which of her
neighbours she would grant ‘favours’ to by letting them use her phone.
The rear of Shanta’s house was adjacent to the main park, which she used for different
social occasions. When her daughter got married, she put up the wedding tent in the park.
The proximity and access to the large open area meant that she could divide her guests
between her house [for family members], the courtyard [for informal guests], and the wed-
ding tent in the main park [for guests from the bridegroom’s side]. In the absence of pri-
vate open space, Shanta clearly viewed the courtyard and the park as extensions of her house
and of her domestic realm. She therefore connected the physical and social environments
more intimately than Sharda or Anita. ‘We are Punjabis so we want nice people to stay here.
We want it clean. See my little hut’57she said.
Shanta’s pride in her house extended to the courtyard where, like many other women resi-
dents in the colony, she spent a large part of her day. She had planted trees on her side of the
FIGURE 8 Shanta’s house with the wedding tent and the make-shift ‘kitchen’ in the park to prepare
food for guests. (Photo: Author, 2002.)
Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
247courtyard to create a ‘pleasing environment’. ‘I put these plants so that we can have some fruits.
I used to eat my lunch here [courtyard] before. Then as people started coming in and building
they dumped building materials in here and all the grass died. So I do what I can do on my
own’ she explained. It was while socializing with her neighbours in the courtyard that Shanta
‘requested’ them to make decorative boxes to help her son’s box-business. Although this busi-
ness was highly seasonal, Shanta’s use of the neighbours’ goodwill and ‘respect’ of her gener-
ation meant that she was able to help her son deliver large orders for boxes on time to make a
handsome profit each festival season. She was also lucky in that she could use her sister’s unoccu-
pied house next door as a store for the boxes till they were ready to be sold. Shanta’s position
as the only original allottee in her courtyard, combined with the architectural transformation of
her house, its material commodities, and her role as ‘employer’, meant that she occupied a pos-
ition of power both within her household as well as among her neighbours in the courtyard.
Shanta’s spatial opportunities were produced from her gender relationships both with her
son and with the Indian State, which contributed to her taking or not taking up these oppor-
tunities. The State’s utopian vision of women’s empowerment as translated into the architec-
ture of widow housing had not produced Shanta as a single self-sufficient widow. Rather, it
had made her more dependent on her earning son to allow her access to a liveable house
and to spaces of economic productivity. Yet, in the presence of a supportive male family
member, Shanta was able to mobilize the architecture of her house, and her social relation-
ships, to empower herself. The State’s vision of empowerment, however, was never completely
irrelevant for Shanta or Sharda – both felt empowered on account of their relationship with
the State and with international organizations. Their legal ownership of the house became
meaningful in providing them access to power within the family and the neighbourhood,
although the architecture of the house itself reinforced gender power relations within the
family. As they engaged with this architecture as a meaningful and embodied practice of every-
day life, transformation both in the houses and in their lives became possible.
FIGURE 9 Boxes ready to go in the festive season. (Photo: Author, 2002.)
248cultural geographies 15(2)
Simi and Mimi
Simi and Mimi were sisters who lived with their two younger brothers and parents as ten-
ants in Shanta’s courtyard. As a Muslim woman, Simi preferred to work from home, and
making the decorative boxes for Shanta provided her with this opportunity. Simi’s narrative,
however, indicates her perceived disempowerment.
It’s a time pass and also a bit of earnings. So kill two birds with one stone. I make about 150 to 200 [boxes] a
day. There are about five of us in this square who make it. But she [Shanta] makes a lot of profit on these. One
day she was telling us that for one box she makes a profit of 25 rupees; and what does she give us? Only one
rupee. What can we say? What if she doesn’t give us even that? So we think let it continue that way. I just do it
thinking that I make a bit of money staying at home.
Simi’s family were the only tenants in the courtyard. Their house was the only one in the
courtyard that had not been rebuilt and was still the original design. When they had first arrived,
their landlord had not given them access to the terrace. Their house was adjacent to the tri-
angular land facing the road, but they could not appropriate this since they were tenants.
Although their landlord had recently installed secure doors and windows, and allowed them
access to the terrace, their house still retained much of the character of the original house.
It used to be very difficult to live here before. And have you seen the room downstairs? No kitchen, nothing.
And we got this bathroom and latrine made here [terrace]. And we didn’t use to have the terrace upstairs; he
[landlord] took it out of the rent.
While their house represented a temporary status, their tenure as tenants deterred oppor-
tunities of social or architectural transformation.
They [neighbours] keep taunting us that we are tenants. They say why are you talking so much? You are tenants.
Those people who put in shanties illegally and stay, the government thinks of them, gives them legal land. Then
they sell it three times. But the government has never thought of the tenants. Those people who have no place
and are paying rent …
FIGURE 10 Private tuitions on the rooftop terrace. (Photo: Author, 2002.)
Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
249In contrast, Mimi was the only member of the family to be educated in university. She
wanted to start a master’s degree but due to her family’s economic condition was compelled
to work full time. During the day, Mimi went from house to house in the neighbourhood,
taking private tuitions; but since the landlord gave them access to the terrace upstairs, every
evening Mimi also tutored the neighbours’ children there. Their parents, however, were con-
tinuously reminded by their extended family that they had not married off their daughters.
For their father with failing eyesight, who could not work as a tailor anymore, this was a double
shame. He was taunted by relatives for being unable to provide for his family and ‘living off ’
his daughters’ earnings. Indeed, in their family, the women were the sole earners – their
mother was a childminder in a nursery, while their older brother was unemployed, and the
younger brother was still in school.
For Simi and Mimi, the architectural quality of their house and their status as tenants
increased their sense of marginality. Nevertheless, both used the courtyard and the terrace for
different politicized practices. The possibilities of architectural transformation were limited,
but they both seized their spatial opportunities in different ways – Simi by box-making in the
courtyard and terrace, and Mimi by taking tuitions in the neighbourhood and on the 
terrace. The differences in their empowerment were shaped by their uneven access to social
capital, as well as their personal transformations made possible through this access. As Mimi
explained,
It [opportunity] depends on oneself too. These people [gesturing towards Simi] are just lazy. They don’t want to
go outside. You know, there was such a nasty place in Madipur in C-block. They said that if a decent girl goes
in that neighbourhood, she can’t return with her honour intact. And I taught in that lousy area for three years.
Nothing ever happened to me. No one ever said anything to me.
Simi’s and Mimi’s spatial stories emphasize the continued (albeit limited) relevance of the
State in shaping forms of women’s empowerment. As tenants, their family had never squatted
on public land, which denied them access to various State resettlement schemes. Instead, they
were reliant on a different set of spatial opportunities to transform their lives. Unlike Sharda,
Anita, or Shanta, their economic participation was induced in the absence of any earning male
family member. Yet, they did not occupy positions of power within their families similar to
Sharda, Anita, or Shanta. Further, Mimi’s rejection of Simi’s desire to remain within the house
as ‘laziness’, suggests that despite being located within similar contexts of architecture, family,
religion, and tenure, Mimi’s access to social capital had transformed her in ways that she was
able to redefine her relations with gender, religion, and place. Thus, their relationships with the
State, society, family, and material places of the house and neighbourhood provided access to
another set of spatial opportunities, whose take-up depended on their personal choices, which
subsequently shaped their unequal geographies of empowerment.
Concluding thoughts
This article’s focus on women’s stories situated within the architecture of widow housing,
illustrates the limits of development discourses that envision women’s empowerment through
housing and tenure as disconnected from their families. ‘Empowerment’, when architecturally
250cultural geographies 15(2)
translated by the Indian State into a utopian low-income widow colony in Delhi, was trans-
formed by the users as they sought to remake themselves and their spaces. The spatial 
stories of the women in Madipur widow colony indicate the ways in which architecture can
become the pre-condition, medium, and outcome of women’s social agency and the terrain
of their politicized practices, but this agency is always embedded in familial ties. Their 
stories show how a particular set of political, social, economic, family, and architectural contexts
contribute to a set of ‘spatial opportunities’ which are selectively taken up by women to
empower themselves in different ways.
These spatial opportunities exist under a particular set of conditions. These include the
State’s vision of women’s empowerment as translated into the architecture of low-income
widow housing, gender relationships within the family and the State, and individual subject-
ive agencies of the women who seized upon some of these ‘spatial opportunities’ to trans-
form themselves. From the spatial stories, it is clear that the role of the State as the provider
of tenure to women is a critical one, since this gives them access to forms of power within
their family and neighbourhood. Yet, the visions of empowerment that were espoused by the
State and were translated into architecture ignored women’s gender relationships within the
family and wider society, while at the same time allowing the possibilities of physical trans-
formations. The spatial stories further illustrate the centrality of gendered relationships within
the family in producing women’s empowerment – the presence of a supportive male family
member able to provide women (such as Shanta, Sharda, and Anita) access to spatial oppor-
tunities that would transform their lives. Further, in the absence of these supportive gender
relations (as in the case of Mimi and Simi), women’s cultural capital becomes crucial in shap-
ing personal decisions to take up certain spatial opportunities while rejecting others. These
‘power-geometries’ of space and place produced by multi-sited and multi-scalar networks of
gender relationships, practiced and realized through architecture, provided opportunities of
transformation in women’s lives. Their gender relationships with the family, State, and archi-
tecture shaped their spatial opportunities and contributed to an ‘uneven geography of archi-
tecture and empowerment’ in Madipur widow colony.
This article thus indicates the wider contribution of architecture to a critical geography of
architecture in the global South. It suggests that in order to truly engage with architecture as
a multi-sited, embodied and embedded, political, and productive practice, critical geography
has to extend beyond the North to the ‘messiness’ of squatter settlements and resettlement
colonies in the South. It suggests that it is important to recognize architecture as a hetero-
geneous political practice within particular social, familial, and material contexts. Finally, it
suggests that it is important to examine architecture within the developmental context of the
global South – particularly in circumstances when it is being transformed through the politi-
cized practices of its users – in order to fully understand its role in civil society.
Acknowledgements
I wish to express my heartfelt gratitude to the residents in Madipur widow colony who gave their time
to this research. My gratitude also extends to officials in HUDCO who provided me with all the draw-
ings and background information. Finally, I wish to thank Mona Domosh and the two anonymous ref-
erees without whose insightful comments I could not have finished this article.
Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
251Biographical note
Ayona Datta is Lecturer in the Cities Programme in London School of Economics. She is co-convenor
of the MSc Culture and Society Degree in the De partment of Sociology. Her research interests include
gender and intersectionality in the production and consumption of place, cultural identity in architec-
ture, and spatiality of social agency. She is currently working on a British Academy Research Grant enti-
tled ‘Mapping the Architecture of Control and Resistance’ which is a qualitative work examining the
intersections between gender, social agency, and place. She can be contacted at: Cities Programme,
Department of Sociology, London School of Economics and Political Science, Houghton Street, London
WC2A 2AE, UK; email: a.datta2@lse.ac.uk
Notes
1M.N. Joglekar, ‘Multi-institutional coordination in facilitating the shelter provision – a case study of
IYSH national site and shelter demonstration project at Madipur, New Delhi’ (New Delhi, undated).
2Saraswati Raju, ‘The Issues at stake: an overview of gender concerns in post-independence India’,
Environment and planning a 29 (1997), pp. 2191–206.
3UN-Habitat, Challenge of the slums (London, Earthscan, 2003).
4A. Roy and N. AlSayyad, eds, Urban informality: transnational perspectives from the Middle-east, Latin America
and South Asia (Lanham, MD, Lexington Books, 2004).
5Such as Belapur housing, Mumbai (1986) by Charles Correa and Aranya Community Housing, Indore
(1989) by B.V . Doshi, which received the Aga Khan Award for Architecture.
6A. Roy, ‘ Transnational trespassings ’, in A. Roy and N. AlSayyad, eds, Urban informality: transnational
perspectives from the Middle-east, Latin America and South Asia (Lanham, MD, Lexington Books, 2004),
pp. 289–318.
7Gita Dewan Verma, ‘Indore’s Habitat Improvement Project: success or failure?’, Habitat international
24 (2000), pp. 91–117.
8Gita Dewan Verma, Slumming India: a chronicle of slums and their saviours (Delhi, Penguin Books, 2002).
9Kriemild Saunders, ed., Feminist post-development thought: rethinking modernity, post-colonialism, and represen-
tation (London, Zed Books, 2002), pp. 1–38; Karin Kapadia, ed., The violence of development: the politics
of identity, gender and social inequalities in India (New Delhi, Kali for Women, 2002), pp. 1–40.
10Saraswati Raju, ‘The issues at stake’, (1997).
11Shail Mayaram, ‘New modes of violence: the backlash against women in the Panchayati system’, in
Karin Kapadia, ed., The violence of development (London, Zed Books, 2002), pp. 393–424.
12Kapadia, ‘Introduction’, in Karin Kapdia, ed., The violence of development , pp. 1–40.
13Gayatri Spivak, ‘Can the subaltern speak?’, in, Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg, eds, Marxism
and the interpretation of culture (1988).
14J. Scott, Seeing Like the state: how certain schemes to improve the world have failed (New Haven, CO, Yale
University Press, 1998).
15L. Lees, ‘Towards a Critical Geography of Architecture: The case of an Ersatz Colosseum’, Ecumene
8(1) (2001), pp. 51–86.
16Lees ‘Towards a Critical Geography of Architecture’ (2001), p. 55.
17M. Llewellyn, ‘Polyvocalism and the public: doing a critical historical geography of architecture’, Area
35(3) (2003), pp. 264–70; M. Llewellyn, ‘ Urban Village’ or ‘White House: Envisioned Spaces, Experienced
Places, and Everyday Life at Kensal House, London in the 1930s , Environment and Planning D (22) (2004),
pp. 229–49.
18Llewellyn, ‘Polyvocalism and the public’ (2003), p. 264.
252cultural geographies 15(2)
19Llewellyn, ‘Polyvocalism and the public’ (2003), p. 229.
20J.M. Jacobs, ‘A geography of big things’, Cultural geographies 13 (2006), pp. 1–27.
21Doreen Massey, Space, place, and gender (Minneapolis, MN, University of Minnesota Press, 1994).
22Jacobs, ‘A geography of big things’ (2006).
23Michel deCerteau, The practice of everyday life (Berkeley, CA, University of California Press, 1988).
24See Leela Fernandez, ‘Beyond public spaces and private spheres: gender, family and working-class
politics in India’, Feminist studies 23(3) (1997), pp. 525–47; Maureen Hays-Mitchell, ‘Voices and visions
from the streets: gender interests and political participation among women informal traders in Latin
America’, Environment and planning d 13 (1995), pp. 445–69; Deborah Martin, ‘Constructing the
“neighbourhood sphere”: gender and community organising’, Gender, place and culture 9(4) (2002),
pp. 333–50; Richa Nagar, ‘Mujhe jawab do! (answer me!): women’s grassroots activism and social
spaces in Chitrakoot (India)’, Gender, place and culture 7(4) (2000), pp. 341–62; Lise Nelson, ‘De-
centering the movement: Collective action, place and the “sedimentation” of radical political discourses’,
Environment and planning d 21 (2003), pp. 559–81.
25A. Datta, ‘Samudayik Shakti: working class feminism and social organisation in Subhash Camp,
New Delhi’, Gender, place and culture 14(2) (2007), pp. 215–31.
26Doreen Massey, ‘Entanglements of power: reflections’, in Joanne Sharp, Paul Routledge, Chris Philo
and Ronan Paddison, eds, Entanglements of power: geographies of domination/resistance (London,
Routledge, 2000), pp. 284.
27Sharp e t al. (2000).
28A. Sivam and S. Karuppannan, ‘Role of state and market in housing delivery for low-income groups
in India’, Journal of housing and the built environment 17 (2002), pp. 69–88.
29In recent years, resettled households are being allocated a plot size of only 12.5 sqm. See Verma,
Slumming India (2002).
30Map prepared by author with information from DDA Slum Wing.
31Since 2000, resettlement has taken place in 11 relocation sites further away from the city –
Papankalan, Rohini, Madanpur Khadar, Narela, and so on.
32Aditya Nigam, ‘Dislocating Delhi: a city in the 1990s’, in Ravi Vasudevan, Jeebesh Bagchi, Ravi
Sundaram, Monica Narula, Geert Lovink and Shudhhabrata Sengupta, eds, Sarai reader 02: cities of
everyday life (Delhi, Sarai, 2002), pp. 40–6.
33Majishtha Banerji, Provision of basic services to slums and squatter settlements , Institute of Social Studies
Trust, Delhi, http://www.isst-india.org/PDF/Basic%20Services%20in%20Slums%20%20Revised%
20draft.pdf.
34L. Royston and A. Durand-Lasserve, Holding their ground: secure land tenure for the urban poor in develop-
ing countries (James & James, Earthscan, 2002).
35Centre for Civil Society, Delhi City Development plan under JNNURM, http://www.ccs.in/
delhicdp.asp.
36UN General Assembly resolution, http://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/37/a37r221.htm.
37UN Chronicle, Global strategy for shelter to the year 2000 adopted; poor and homeless are its main
focus, 1988, http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1309/is_n3_v25/ai_6811552.
38Planning Commission, National housing and habitat policy 1998 (New Delhi, Ministry of Urban Affairs &
Employment, Government of India, 1998), p. 9, http://www.planningcommission.nic.in. Accessed
on 20 January 2003.
39Planning Commission, Seventh Five-year Plan, Vol 2, Delhi, (Government of India, 1985),
http://planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/7th/vol2/7v2ch12.html.
40Ministry of Urban Development, Annual Report 1991–92, http://mhupa.gov.in/pdf/annual-
reports/1991–1992/English/16.pdf.
Datta: Architecture of low-income widow housing
25341See Raju (1997) for a detailed discussion of Indian State’s provision of ‘equality of opportunities’
to all, including women’s access to credit and employment, land or property, political equality, and
protection against male violence.
42http://www.dda.org.in.
43This was told to me by the original allottees living there.
44Ministry of Urban Development, ‘Chapter 14: Urban Development’, in Annual Report 1990–91 ,
http://urbanindia.nic.in/moud/quickaccess/Office_Files/main.htm.
45UN Habitat, ‘Success stories iPn Shelter’, in Global strategy for shelter to the year 2000 in action (UNCHS
– Nairobi, 2001), http://nzdl.sadl.uleth.ca/cgibin/library?e /H11005q-00000-000---off-0hdl--00-0--0-10-0---
0---0prompt-10---4-----stx--0-1l--11-en-50---20-about-madipur--00-0-1-00-0-0-11-1-0utfZz-8-
00&a /H11005d&c/H11005hdl&srp /H110050&srn /H110050&cl/H11005search&d /H11005HASH420eab03c03890ef6b359f.3.3.2. Accessed on
23 April 2007.
46UN Habitat (2001).
47Mentioned in the UN document as something that the women had expressly requested, although
in my interviews I could not find any evidence of this.
48Most resettlement colonies in Delhi were built on this concept. It helped keep initial building costs
down and put responsibility on the new owners to later upgrade the unit.
49K.K. Bhatnagar, ‘Women’s role in shelter planning’, in H. Dandekar, ed., Shelter, women and develop-
ment: first and third world perspectives (University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, George Wahr Publishing
Co., 1991), p. 60.
50Adapted from the HUDCO original plan.
51The house could be entered from the courtyard or from the rear pedestrian lane. It is rare in other
resettlement colonies to find plots with two sides open.
52Most widows had been under the impression that they were freeholders of the land. They came
to understand later that the housing cooperative owned the land on which they were required to
pay instalments on leasehold.
53As translated from Hindi, ‘space’ here refers to an empty piece of land or area, rather than the
geographical concept of space.
54Refers to Uttar Pradesh, a northern state in India.
55There was reluctance among participants to mention encroachment of open space since they were
aware that this was ‘illegal’. Hence they all limited themselves to describing changes as covering of
their front and back porch when asked.
56Wolf, D., ‘Daughters, decisions, and domination: critique of household strategies’, in N. Visvanathan,
L. Duggan, L. Nisonoff and N. Wiegersma, eds, The women, gender, and development reader (London,
Zed Books, 2000), pp. 118–32.
57To refer to one’s house as a hut is usually a sign of modesty. This is done especially when one
knows that one’s house is better than the others.
Copyright of Cultural Geographies is the property of Sage Publications, Ltd. and its content may
not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's

express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual

use.

2019 Architecture, Culture, and Spirituality Symposium (ACSF 11) 1 of 5  Embodied Cultural Continuity and Change:  Designing the Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate Cultural Center  Phoebe Crisman University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA  crisman@virginia.edu   Wakȟáŋyeža kiŋ lená épi čha táku waštéšte iwíčhuŋkičiyukčaŋpi kte.   Let us put our minds together and see what life we can make for our children.  - Tȟatȟáŋka Íyotake (Chief Sitting Bull)1   There is a profound overlap between Frank Lloyd Wright’s architectural conception of continuity and the world view and traditional architecture of many Native American tribes. Like the pueblo, earth lodge, and tipi typologies, Wright’s buildings seek to integrate with the land, climate, culture, and material of a place. The architecture of Taliesin West connects deeply with the physical and spiritual nature of the Sonoran Desert through site-sourced stone and low, planar forms that provide shade and channel air. Wright described living in the desert as a spiritual cathartic and how “Our new desert camp belongs to the Arizona desert as though it had stood there during creation.”2 Pueblo architecture and earth lodges of the Great Plains attained this situatedness. Yet, traditional Native American spirituality goes beyond site specificity to understands everything as related—stones, plants, creatures—all part of a living universe. While a compelling vision, Sioux scholar Vine Deloria Jr. rejected the possibility of American Indians living in harmony with nature today because indigenous culture has been radically transformed over time and deliberately destroyed by US government policies.3 Amidst this loss, however, Deloria found American Indian spiritual traditions still more in tune with the needs of the modern world than Christianity with its historic support of imperialism and disregard for ecology.4 What does the culture of indigenous peoples mean for their architecture today? And architecture more broadly?   These questions were explored through the collaborative design of a gathering place for the Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate to reclaim their culture, spirituality, and tribal sovereignty.5 The Sisseton and Wahpeton are two bands of the Dakotah tribe and the larger Očhéthi Šakówiŋ. The word Dakotah may be translated as friend or ally and derives from the word WoDakotah, which means “harmony—a condition of being at peace with oneself and in harmony with one another and with nature.”6 Yet, over sixty percent of the Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate (SWO) live in poverty and forty percent are unemployed.7 Poor education, lack of skills and jobs, substance abuse, and youth suicide are barriers to individual and community thriving. Understanding current tribal conditions requires a knowledge of Dakotah history. Human rights atrocities during the Dakota war, the subsequent mass internment of over 1,700 women and children at Fort Snelling, and forced displacement from their wooded homelands in Minnesota to barren prairie reservations still affect the tribe. Settler colonization and mandatory assimilation were achieved through federal laws that prohibited speaking the Dakotah language and engaging in Native spiritual practices. Children were forcibly removed from families and sent to Christian boarding schools that eradicated their Dakotah identity, language, and way of life. Tribal trauma also includes the historic discrimination that accompanied European contact and continues today. Yet the Dakotah nations have survived and are in the process of defining for themselves how they will integrate their cultural knowledge, practices, and Dakotah language with their current affairs.8  
2019 Architecture, Culture, and Spirituality Symposium (ACSF 11) 2 of 5  Seeking to support those efforts, a transdisciplinary team of University of Virginia (UVA) faculty and students worked with SWO citizens to design a self-sufficient and sustainable cultural center on their Lake Traverse Reservation in South Dakota.9 The group explored how architecture can embody culture and spirituality through space, form, material, and use. Native American ecological paradigms10 and cultural identity were studied as ways of healing the effects of systemic social injustice and influencing the architecture—from form to materials and making.  Also, the design process was informed by theories of agency11 and community engagement,12 feminist writings by Donna Haraway, Sandra Harding, and Caroline Ramazanoglu,13 and Richa Nagar’s work on co-authorship and storytelling as tools of empowerment.14 The negativity many Dakotah people feel toward “carpentered,” rectangular forms and spaces were explored during a four-day co-design workshop on the Reservation.15 By nurturing relationships with tribal members and recognizing different subjectivities of the participants, the UVA students and faculty were able to situate their design research within the context of knowledge production on the Reservation.  The Cultural Center will be located at the Sisseton Wahpeton Tribal College, where massive, nondescript rectangular buildings float on a field of asphalt within the larger Jeffersonian grid.16 Asserting autonomy from this cartesian condition, the design weaves into a restored tallgrass prairie at the campus edge. A village of small, off-the-grid studio buildings encircles a central tiotipi inspired by traditional earth lodges. The tiotipi will support storytelling, theater, music, and dance performances. Students of all ages will learn about traditional crafts and new film and digital media practices in the studios. Archive and gallery spaces will safely store and display historical tribal artifacts. Intertwined gardens and work courts will provide places to learn about native medicinal plants, seed saving, and Native foods. The holistic Dakotah world view directly influences the architecture. The ceremonial directions–east, west, north, south, sky, and earth—establish the everchanging center of their universe. Every place can be a ceremonial center, the here and now, representing all times taking place simultaneously, and making ‘whole again what has now become disassociated and chaotic’.17 Situated within this cosmological model, the cultural center will be a place to make the Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate whole again. Akin to Dewey’s idea of continuity, the center, like an organism, “does not live in an environment; it lives by means of an environment.”18 Powered by wind and sun, the buildings will collect rainwater and be warmed by the earth’s geothermal heat. Made of locally sourced wood, rammed earth, and hemp insulation, the buildings are designed to be built in phases by tribal members, vocational students, and UVA students working together without heavy equipment. The construction process itself will build tribal capacity and community.   By creating a place for intergenerational education and reflection that resonates with Dakotah values, the architecture of the cultural center seeks a central role in the tribe’s effort to undo colonial legacies, advance economic and political sovereignty, and support cultural flourishing. This co-design project was not structured as a gift between benefactor and recipient, but rather as a process of exchange and mutual expansiveness between two diverse communities—each sharing their knowledge and ways of being in the world. Many lessons learned in the process might be transferred to non-indigenous communities in search of an architecture of meaning. 
  

2019 Architecture, Culture, and Spirituality Symposium (ACSF 11) 3 of 5    Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate Cultural Center in restored prairie landscape  
   UVA team with Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate collaborators in earth lodge  

2019 Architecture, Culture, and Spirituality Symposium (ACSF 11) 4 of 5    Notes 1 Tȟatȟáŋka Íyotake, known as Chief Sitting Bull, was a Lakota leader credited with this quotation. 2 Quote credited to Frank Lloyd Wright on Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation website <https://franklloydwright.org/frank-lloyd-wrights-taliesin-west/> [accessed 12 January 2019] 3 Vine Deloria Jr., Custer Died for your Sins: An Indian Manifesto (New York: MacMillan, 1969) and Vine Deloria Jr., Spirit and Reason (Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing, 1999).                                                 

2019 Architecture, Culture, and Spirituality Symposium (ACSF 11) 5 of 5                                                                                                                                              4 Vine Deloria Jr., God is Red: A Native View of Religion (New York: Putnam, 1972). 5 Darren Ranco and Dean Suagee, “Tribal Sovereignty and the Problem of Difference in Environmental Regulation: Observations on “Measured Separatism” in Indian Country,” Antipode, 39/4 (2007), 691-707. 6 Suzanne J. Crawford and Dennis F. Kelley, American Indian Religious Traditions: An Encyclopedia (Santa Barbara, Denver and Oxford, England: ABC Clio, 2005). 7 Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate website <http://www.swo-nsn.gov> [accessed 10 January 2019] 8 Jack D. Forbes. “Nature and Culture: Problematic Concepts for Native Americans,” in Indigenous Traditions and Ecology, ed. John A. Grim (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001), 119. 9 Collaborators included Dustina Gill, Director of the native NGO Nis’to; Erin Griffin, Director of Dakotah Studies at the Sisseton Wahpeton Tribal College; University of Virginia Professor of Architecture Phoebe Crisman and Professor of Global Development Studies David Edmunds; Adriana Greci-Green, Curator of Indigenous Arts of the Americas at the Fralin Museum of Art; and Karenne Woods, Director of Indian Programs at the Virginia Foundation for the Humanities. 10 See Cassandra Barnum, “A Single Penny, an Inch of Land, or an Ounce of Sovereignty,” Ecology Law Quarterly, 37 (2010). Also Darren Ranco and Dean Suagee, “Tribal Sovereignty and the Problem of Difference in Environmental Regulation: Observations on ‘Measured Separatism’ in Indian Country,” Antipode, 39/4 (2007), 691-707.  11 According to Anthony Giddens, [Agency] means being able to intervene in the world, or to refrain from such intervention, with the effect of influencing a specific process or state of affairs. See Anthony Giddens, The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984), 14. Also Bruno Latour, Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1987) and Tatjana Schneider and Jeremy Till, “Beyond Discourse: Notes on Spatial Agency,” Footprint: Delft School of Design Journal 4 (2009). 12 Ernest Boyer, “The Scholarship of Engagement,” Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1996). Mark Wood, “From Service to Solidarity: Engaged Education and Democratic Globalization,” Journal of Higher Education Outreach and Engagement, 8, 2 (2003), 165-181. 13 Donna Haraway, “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective,” Feminist Studies, 14, 3 (1988), 575-599. Sandra Harding, Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Thinking from Women’s Lives (New York: Cornell University Press, 1991).  Caroline Ramazanoglu and Janet Holland, Feminist Methodology: Challenges and Choices (London: Sage, 2002). 14 Richa Nagar, Muddying the Waters: Coauthoring Feminisms across Scholarship and Activism (Urbana, Chicago and Springfield: University of Illinois Press, 2014).  15 Fixico, D. 2003. American Indian Circular Philosophy, The American Indian Mind in a Linear World. Routledge: 41-62. 16 William Cronon, Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of New England (New York: Hill & Wang, 1983). Carolyn Merchant, Ecological Revolutions: Nature, Gender, and Science in New England (Chapel Hill: University of South Carolina Press, 1989). 17 Deloria, Spirit and Reason, 55. 18 John Dewey, Logic. The Theory of Inquiry (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1938), 25. Also Kevin Armitage, “The Continuity of Nature and Experience: John Dewey's Pragmatic Environmentalism,” Capitalism Nature Socialism, 14, 3 (2003), 49-72.   
       Interior of tiotipi and surrounding gallery / Image credits: UVA Crisman SWO Collaborative Studio, Fall 2018  

Article
Epistemic and
Technological
Determinism in
Development Aid
Jan Cherlet1,2
Abstract
Since the turn of the millennium, the major development agencies have been
promoting ‘‘knowledge for development,’’ ‘‘ICT for development,’’ or the
‘‘knowledge economy’’ as new paradigms to prompt development in less-
developed countries. These paradigms display an unconditional trust in the
power of Western technology and scientific knowledge to trigger
development—they taste of epistemic and technological determinism. This
article probes, by means of a genealogy, how and when development
cooperation began adhering to epistemic and technological determinism, and
which forms this adhesion has taken over time. The genealogy shows, first,
that knowledge and technology have always been integrally part of the very
‘‘development’’ idea since this idea was shaped during enlightenment. Second,
while the genealogy reveals that epistemic and technological determinism
were embedded in the development idea from the very beginning, it also
illustrates that the determinism has always been challenged by critical voices.
1Department of Conflict and Development Studies, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
2International Centre for the History of Universities and Science, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy
Corresponding Author:
Jan Cherlet, Ghent University, Universiteitsstraat 8, Ghent 9000, Belgium.
Email: jan.cherlet@ugent.beScience, Technology, & Human Values
2014, Vol. 39(6) 773-794
ªThe Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0162243913516806
sthv.sagepub.com

Keywords
development, politics, power, governance, technological determinism
Introduction
P o i n tf o u ro fP r e s i d e n tH a r r yT r u m a n’s inaugural address, pronounced
on January 20, 1949, in front of the US Congress, has been indicated
by many scholars as the emblematic milestone in—or even starting point
of—international development aid.1Truman (1949) stated the following:
[W]e must embark on a bold new program for making the benefits of our sci-
entific advances and industrial progress available for the improvement and
growth of underdeveloped areas. [ ...] For the first time in history, humanity
possesses the knowledge and skill to relieve suffering of these people.
Nearly half a century later, the World Bank published the 1998/1999 World
Development Report, entitled Knowledge for Development . The report
opened with this statement:
Knowledge is like light. Weightless and intangible, it can easily travel the
world, enlightening the lives of people everywhere. Yet billions of people
still live in the darkness of poverty—unnecessarily. [ ...] Poor coun-
tries—and poor people—differ from rich ones not only because they have less
capital but because they have less knowledge. Knowledge is often costly to
create, and that is why much of it is created in industrial countries. But devel-
oping countries can acquire knowledge overseas as well as create their own at
home. (World Bank 1998, 1)
Although half a century lies in between the two statements, and although they
stem from different institutions, the similarities are striking. Both quotes dis-
play an unconditional trust in the power of Western scientific knowledge and
technology (K&T) to develop the ‘‘less-developed’’ countries. They display,
in other words, a high degree of technological determinism.
Technological determinism has become an old-fashioned topic in the
study of science and technology (S&T), since most scholars have dismissed
this ideology, once and for all, as reductive (Wyatt 2008; Bijker 2010). This
does not mean, however, that it is not with us in public discourses. Wyatt
notices that technological determinism is overtly harnessed by public actors
to justify or promote ‘‘particular directions of change’’ (Wyatt 2008, 175).774 Science, Technology, & Human Values 39(6)
Such changes are exactly what the previously mentioned two quotes
envisaged. So, although scholars have deconstructed and rebutted the tech-
nological determinist ideology in se, we still need to ask why and how it
remains very present in public discourse.
This article seeks to understand the presence of technological determin-
ism in development aid discourses. It will not retell the role of K&T in the
development of civilizations (as in McClellan and Dorn 2006), nor their
role in imperialist endeavors (as in Headrick 2010). Neither will this article
analyze the practices and consequences of transferring Western K&T to
the Global South through development cooperation (as in Escobar 1995;
Mehta 2001; Anderson 2002; Wilson 2007). Instead, this article probes the
origins of the Western idea that development is propelled by K&T. The gen-
ealogy of this idea necessarily begins at a time before there was talk of
development cooperation. By reexamining landmark publications of influ-
ential thinkers (sixteenth to nineteenth century) and of the United Nations
(UN) and the World Bank (twentieth and twenty-first century), the geneal-
ogy reveals how and when this idea became embedded in the paradigms that
have dominated development cooperation.
The outline of the article is as follows. The next section summarizes
what technological determinism means and extends it to epistemic deter-
minism. The third section sketches a brief genealogy, from enlightenment
to date, of the idea that K&T are fundamental in/for development. The
fourth section discusses the genealogy.
On Technological and Epistemic Determinism
Before presenting the genealogy of K&T in/for development, it is necessary
to clarify the concepts of technological and epistemic determinism, as they
will provide the touchstone for the analysis of the genealogy. Critics have
dissected technological determinism as an ideology that is based on two
complementary assumptions (Wyatt 2008). First, it asserts that technology
evolves independently from society, following its own inherent, linear,
accumulative logic. Second, it assumes that this technological change
drives—or determines—social change.
Although these ideas are deeply embedded in common explanations of
change, historians and sociologists of S&T have resolved that there is not
a unidirectional causal link between technological change and social
change—as technological determinism suggests—nor does technology
develop along its own inherent goal-directed path (Bijker 1995; OudshoornCherlet 775
and Pinch 2008). Society and technology coevolve in an intimate and
complex way (Bijker 2010).
By analogy with technological determinism, epistemic determinism can be
defined as the two-footed ideology that knowledge is an immaterial good
whose production is independent of the social context, and that this immaterial
good can be transferred, without much effort, to another social context where it
will have meanings and effects similar to those in the original social context.
Like technology, all knowledge is produced and reproduced by humans.
Therefore, social scientists now generally agree that knowledge is necessa-
rily partial and profoundly connected with its specific social context. This
idea was already present in the work of nineteenth-century continental phi-
losophers such as Nietzsche ([1887]1967), but became more prominent
after the postmodern turn, especially through the work of Haraway on ‘‘situ-
ated knowledge’’ (Haraway 1988). Claims of universality in knowledge
production are now considered naive, and where they do appear, these
claims can be deconstructed as strategies that seek to overrule competing
sources of knowledge (Thompson 2001).
To summarize, whereas technological determinism does not acknowl-
edge that technology and society coevolve, epistemic determinism does not
recognize that all knowledge is socially and historically situated. So, when a
development paradigm reifies K&T and ascribes them a particular role in a
bid to prompt social change (or development), it verges on epistemic or
technological determinism.
A Genealogy of K&T in/for Development
The following paragraphs retrace the key paradigms that invoked K&T for
the sake of development. The first part reanalyzes the emergence of the
development idea during enlightenment to understand the role enlightened
thinkers attributed to K&T in development. The genealogy then unearths
how this discursive link between K&T and development molded the incep-
tion of development aid at the end of the Second World War. The second
and largest part of this section reexamines salient publications of the UN
and the World Bank, from the 1940s until the 2010s, which invoke K&T
as drivers of development.
The genealogy deliberately concentrates on the hegemonic paradigms of
prominent thinkers (in the first part) and powerful development agencies
(in the second part). Following a Nietzschean–Foucauldian approach, it
describes the historical context in which these paradigms emerged and the
subaltern paradigms that tried to counter them.776 Science, Technology, & Human Values 39(6)
The Genesis of the ‘‘Development’’ Idea
The idea of development as linear, cumulative, and unlimited phenom-
enon is the brainchild of a Wester n world view that emerged during
enlightenment (Escobar 1995; Rist 1996). It is closely related to the
enlightened view on knowledge. Classic al philosophers such as Aristotle
saw nature as cyclic, developing through the stages of birth, growth,
decline, and death, without ever reaching the perfect state. Christianity
and Saint Augustine linearized growth and added a telos to development:
everything was believed to develop according God’s plan toward the inev-
itable end of the world (Rist 1996). Ho wever, there was no trace yet of the
idea that knowledge, technology, a nd social organization develop in a
cumulative manner. The knowledge produced by the classical Greek and
Roman thinkers, for instance, preserved an insurmountable status until
enlightenment (Rist 1996).
This idea remained influential until challenged by Bacon, Descartes, and
Pascal in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. For example, Descartes
stated around 1628 that ‘‘we should not give great credit to the Ancients
on account of their antiquity [ ...] For the world is older now than it was
then, and we have a greater experience of things’’ (Descartes 1964–1974,
204). Bernard le Bovier de Fontenelle wrote that ‘‘a great, savage mind
is, so to speak, composed by all great minds of all preceding centuries;
[...] mankind will never degenerate and the sane voices of all the great
minds that follow will always add one to another’’ (Fontenelle
[1688]1752). Knowledge started to be described as accumulative: every gen-
eration can benefit from the existing body of knowledge and can add its own
bit to it. A decline in knowledge and science was believed to be impossible.
The supposed accumulative character of knowledge and its beneficial
effects were contested by a minority of thinkers, including Jean-Jacques
Rousseau, David Hume, and Adam Ferguson. Hume wrote that ‘‘when the
arts and sciences come to perfection in any state, from that moment they
naturally, or rather necessarily, decline, and seldom or never revive in that
nation where they formerly flourished’’ (Hume [1752]1854, 146).
Despite the dissident voices, what is left by the end of the eighteenth
century is the hegemonic idea of linear progress and infinite growth in our
knowledge of the natural world and our power to control it through technol-
ogy. This view nurtured a general acceptance of technological determinism.
Indeed, all streams of thought in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries—
the enthusiastic as well as the critical—held that S&T were powerful agents
of social change (Smith 1994). It was believed that if knowledgeCherlet 777
accumulated then technology also accumulated, and socioeconomic organi-
zation would become more sophisticated.
The first enlightened voices that called to export to the colonies the
advantages of European K&T invoked precisely Europe’s epistemic super-
iority as justification. Condorcet, last of the Encyclope ´distes —and a fervent
critic of slavery—wrote in 1793 that:
The Europeans [ ...] will disseminate, in Africa and in Asia, the European
principles and example of freedom, of the enlightened, and of reason. [ ...]
[The colonies] are just waiting for our help to become civilized, and are wait-
ing to find brothers among the Europeans, in order to become their friends
andpupils . (Condorcet 1795, 335, translation and emphasis by the author)
Apparently a teacher–pupil relationship—with Europe in the role of the
teacher—was already part of the progress ideology by the second half of the
eighteenth century.
The rise of social evolutionism in the nineteenth century molded West-
ern thinking concerning development and development aid in an important
way. All societies of this planet were believed to pass through a number of
stages of evolution, from savagery to civilization. Moreover, the path was
said to be universal, hence identical for all societies, and this created a
unifying bond among all peoples. This also meant that the savage tribes
in the colonies were believed to lead the life that our ancestors had led some
millennia ago and that evolution would inevitably transform their society in
a society similar to the European.
The successive stages of social e volution were characterized by
increasing complexity in social orga nization, technology, and knowledge.
In this sense, social evolutionism added two meanings to K&T in devel-
opment. First, August Comte argued t hat human thought ‘‘passes succes-
sively through three different theor etical conditions: t he theological or
fictitious; the metaphysic al, or abstract; and the scientific, or positive’’
(Comte [1830]1975, 71). As a consequence, Western society was pre-
sented to have superior knowledge— in an absolute manner—with respect
to non-European societies, since Europe was in the utmost advanced stage
of evolution. Second, the type of K&T th at a society possessed, such as its
agricultural techniques, tools, o r writing system, was a measure of the
evolutionary stage it found itself in (as in Morgan [1877]1974).
By the nineteenth century, Europe felt a new urge to colonize (the
Scramble for Africa), in particular to find new markets for the expanding
European industry (Arndt 1987). Social evolutionism, disguised as778 Science, Technology, & Human Values 39(6)
philanthropy, was a helping hand in selling the new colonialism to the public.
For instance, Jules Ferry, French Minister of External Affairs at the end of the
nineteenth century, believed that ‘‘superior races have rights over inferior
races, because they also have obligations towards them; they have the
obligation to civilize the inferior races’’ (Ferry 1885, translation by the author).
It needs to be underlined that the objective of civilizing the ‘‘inferior
races’’ was, at that time, still completely detached from the idea of stimu-
lating their economic development (Arndt 1987). Economic development
was only reserved for European economies.
Social evolutionism was also reflected in the philosophy behind the
League of Nations founded in 1919. The Covenant of the League of Nations
is the first multilateral agreement that mentions the concept of development
and the idea that nations and peoples can develop over time. Article 22 of
the Covenant, which regulated the Mandatories (i.e. mandated control) of
some member nations over others on behalf of the League, defended these
Mandatories in terms of the different stages of development that nations
found themselves in.
President Harry Truman, whose inaugural address of 1949 has been
partly cited in the introduction of the article, distinguished developed from
underdeveloped countries in a more clear-cut way than the League of
Nations did. The developed people needed to help the underdeveloped in
their economic development, Truman stated. The scope: maintaining world
peace. The means: the transfer of scientific knowledge and industrial
technology.
By proposing such a transfer as a trigger of development, Truman merely
expressed the spirit of the times. Landes (1998, 501) recalls the British
groundnut scheme, implemented in Tanganyika over the period 1946–54,
as ‘‘the mother’’ of all technology transfer projects. This program had to
show what the British government was capable of when it implemented
modern Western technology and expertise in their colonies. Although the
peanuts were destined for the British market and not for the African, it was
argued that the local farmers would learn from the large-scale industrializa-
tion in agriculture and successfully copy it. This is the context in which the
idea of Technical Assistance (TA) emerged.
From TA to Capacity Building
Through 1947 and 1948, the term technical assistance was coined to
indicate the official help that was offered by the UN Economic Affairs
Department. In 1949, under impetus of Truman’s point four, an ExpandedCherlet 779
Program of TA was created (which in 1965 became the UN Development
Programme [UNDP]). TA was initially a program of unidirectional knowl-
edge transfer, in the hands of Western experts and colored by evolutionist
thinking. Local knowledge or traditions were seen as obstacles, ‘‘rapid
economic progress is impossible without painful adjustments. Ancient phi-
losophies have to be scrapped; old social institutions have to disintegrate’’
(UN 1951, 4). The TA program of the UN and loans of the World Bank were
aimed at offering ‘‘tech-fix’’ assistance and giving ‘‘the big push’’ to
underdeveloped countries, mostly in the form of large infrastructure and
technology works, in an attempt to start weaving the network of economic
activity. Social well-being would follow automatically.
The absolute power of Western S&T, and the conviction that this scientific
knowledge was a global good, still set the tone in 1963 at the first UN Con-
ference in Geneva on the Application of S&T for the Benefit of the Less
Developed Areas. The conference was taken as a scientific rather than a polit-
ical meeting. Scientists and technical experts dominated the Geneva confer-
ence, 84 percent of them coming from the developed world (Standke 2006).
Surprisingly, David Owen, Chairman of the UN Technical Assistance
Board and generally well aligned with the US government, anticipated
already in 1950 much of the criticism of TA that would grow in the
1960s and 1970s:
An economic mission from any one of the great industrial powers, no matter
how benevolent the intentions, may [ ...] be met with charges [ ...] that its
purpose is to bring the country under some form of foreign economic domi-
nation [...] Moreover, even if the good intentions of the mission are fully
appreciated, there remains the danger of a one-sided approach to the solution
of the technical problems which the mission encounters. It is only natural that
technical experts from any one country will be inclined to recommend a
duplication of the institutions, organization, and techniques which have
proved successful in their own country, though in many cases these solutions
arenot necessarily compatible with the social and political structure of the
recipient . (Owen 1950, 110, emphases by the author)
The discussions about TA, anticipated by Owen but growing widespread
throughout the 1960s, mostly evolved around the effectiveness of TA. They
did not question the epistemological premises of the unidirectional transfer
of K&T from the West to the underdeveloped world.
Criticism culminated in the late 1960s with the emergence of the Depen-
dency School, a group of critical scholars and policy makers based in Latin780 Science, Technology, & Human Values 39(6)
America (e.g. Frank 1969). They argued that the ‘‘center’’ of the world (the
West) had developed at the expense of the ‘‘periphery’’ (the ex-colonies).
They blamed development assistance for perpetuating this unequal relation-
ship and technology transfer for creating dependency.
With the appointment of Robert McNamara as the President of the
World Bank in 1968, attention began to shift from the needs of economic
growth to the needs of the very poor. Although the agencies continued to
finance large infrastructure to some extent, the World Bank and UNDP
began to be primarily concerned with rural development, poverty allevia-
tion, and the reinforcement of local organizations. The development support
was increasingly directed to grassroots development (Nolan 2002).
One expression of this attention to the poorest was the search for new
forms of ‘‘appropriate’’ or ‘‘alternative’’ technologies, more adaptable to
the local contexts in underdeveloped regions. In the early 1970s,
Schumacher (1973) and others elaborated on the idea of ‘‘intermediate tech-
nologies’’ for development: technologies that float somewhere between
traditional village techniques and advanced capital-intensive technologies
of the Western world. The term was soon replaced by ‘‘appropriate technol-
ogies,’’ indicating any technology that is small scale, labor intensive rather
than capital intensive, energy efficient, environmentally sustainable, and
controlled and maintained by the local community of a developing region
(Murphy, McBean, and Farahbakhsh 2009). The concept of appropriate
technology and some sensibility of local knowledge were gradually adopted
in the World Bank models of technology transfer (Visvanathan 2001), in
order to improve the technology transfer. There was no attempt yet, within
the development agencies, to question the transfer itself.
It should be noted that the attention to the rural poor in the late 1960s was
not entirely new. The Green Revolution of the 1960s and 1970s was based
on research that was already started up in the 1940s by the Rockefeller and
Ford foundations. However, their early attention to the food security of the
poorest—also surfacing in Truman’s speech—mostly stemmed from a con-
cern about the rise of communism. Secure food production, it was said, was
essential to keep the poor rural populations in developing countries
‘‘happy’’ and keep them away from communism (Ross 2003).
In any case, until the late 1960s the main scope of development aid was,
without doubt, economic growth and the production of material goods.
Along with economic growth, rural poverty would decline. Only toward the
end of the 1960s, the rural poor came to the center stage of development
programs. In the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s, the world also
witnessed the increasing bargaining power of the developing countriesCherlet 781
themselves—the so-called ‘‘nonaligned’’ countries—at the international
political stage (Rist 1996). In addition to a New International Economic
Order they demanded better access to S&T.
The World Plan of Action for the Application of Science and Technol-
ogy for Development, presented in 1971 by the UN Advisory Committee
on Science and Technology for Development (ACAST), reflected this new
political climate by proposing the following targets (UN 1971):
/C15developing countries should increase their domestic S&T output;
/C15developed countries should intensify their aid to build up the S&T
capacities in developing countries;
/C15a portion of the R&D in developed countries should be focused on
the specific needs of developing countries.
The instrumental and deterministic role attributed by ACAST to scien-
tific output was criticized by a group of scholars in the Sussex Manifesto
(Singer et al. 1970)—a document that was initially meant to be the introduc-
tory chapter of the World Plan of Action. The Sussex Group left behind all
discourses about ‘‘catch-up’’ or about ‘‘the troubles in technology transfer.’’
Instead they argued that development was about improving the local
capabilities2(Shah 2009). They contended that development ‘‘depends on
people with outlook, knowledge, training and equipment to solve the prob-
lems posed by their own environment, and thus control their environment
rather than be controlled by it’’ (Singer et al. 1970). It is noteworthy that the
radical Manifesto still sustained ‘‘economic production’’ as ultimate aspira-
tion for the developing countries.
In 1979, the UN organized a seco nd Conference on Science and
Technology for Development in Vie nna. Unlike the first one in Geneva,
this conference was politic al, rather than technical , and participants were
governments, not scientists. Under pressure from the nonaligned
countries, the discussions were mo re about the equitable access to S&T
rather than about K&T transfer as suc h (Standke 2006). Despite this shift
in attention, discussions about equita ble access still adhered to the main-
stream philosophy that any injectio no fS & Tw o u l dl e a dt od e v e l o p m e n t .
Critical voices questioning Western S&T were kept out of the conference
(Shah 2009).
While the UN made strong efforts to give the field of S&T a highly
visible role in its deliberations during the 1960s and 1970s, today the UN
is no longer seen as a prime actor in this field (Standke 2006). The General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the World Trade Organization782 Science, Technology, & Human Values 39(6)
(WTO) have taken over the negotiations about access to S&T. This transfer
of competences gradually happened during the 1980s, when the world wit-
nessed the rise of the neoliberal ideology and its commitment to the benefits
of market liberalization for developing countries. Scientific K&T were
increasingly considered ‘‘a commodity that can be traded like many others’’
(World Bank 1987, 64)3. Ambitious renegotiations of the GATT, known as
the Uruguay round, started in 1986 and eventually led to an extension of
international Intellectual Property Rights and to the establishment of WTO
in 1995.
While the 1980s’ neoliberal theory attributed an exogenous role to S&T
in growth, the 1990s’ New Growth Theory endorsed the endogenous role of
knowledge in economic growth (Romer 1993). By the end of the 1990s, the
primary recommendation of the development agencies to developing coun-
tries was to increase the national human capital in a bet to generate growth
from knowledge-related activities in the global ‘‘Knowledge Economy’’
(Cozzens et al. 2008). The 1998/1999 World Development report Knowl-
edge for Development (World Bank 1998), whose opening statement was
quoted in the introduction of this article, was imbued with this knowledge
economy paradigm.
Rooted in another strain of thought, but closely related to the knowledge
economy paradigm, was the theory of innovation systems (Freeman 1982;
Edquist 1997 among others). This theory positioned the generation of
science, technology, innovations, and development within a network
of interrelated actors: the innovation system. The three typical categories
of actors in an innovation system are research institutions (both public and
private), governmental bodies, and private enterprises (Edquist 1997). The
concept reflected an important shift in the understanding of technological
production: the linear chain of invention–innovation–diffusion has been
replaced by a dynamic process of nonlinear learning between multiple
agents. Development policies that adhered to the innovation system theory
sought to identify and promote the political configurations and strategic
investments that are needed to initiate or accelerate the process of innova-
tion and technological development.
Innovation systems have the merit of drawing attention to the wider and
plural milieu of knowledge production. Whereas TA was still primarily
concerned with one-to-one knowledge transfer, innovation systems made
clear that the actual dynamic of knowledge production is many to many
(Wilson 2007).
When Wolfensohn was appointed President of the World Bank in 1996, he
declared that the Bank had to become a Knowledge Bank (Wolfensohn 1996):Cherlet 783
We have been in the business of research and disseminating the lessons of
development for a long time. But the revolution in information technology
increased the potential value of these efforts by vastly extending their reach.
[...] We need to [ ...] enhance our ability to gather development infor-
mation and experience, and share it with our clients. We need to become,
in effect, the Knowledge Bank.
The 1998/1999 World Development Report, an immediate product of this
new line of thought, combines elements of knowledge economy, knowledge
management, and Information and communications technology (ICT) for
development.
Knowledge management aimed to convert the tacit knowledge of
individual experts or employees into explicit, manageable knowledge
(Evers, Kaiser, and Mu ¨ller 2009). King and McGrath (2004) distinguished
two tendencies. The first or ‘‘technological’’ approach was the one that tried
to capture, store, and distribute by means of ICT the knowledge that already
existed among experts in an organization. The second or ‘‘social’’ approach
focused more on putting people together in teams, in order to take advan-
tage of their tacit knowledge.
Wolfensohn, by stating that the World Bank must become a Knowledge
Bank, clearly harnessed the technological approach. For this purpose, the
World Bank created the Global Development Network with a public web
portal, the Global Development Gateway, that collects and disseminates
development-related knowledge on topics as varied as economics, AIDS,
natural resources management, and so on. UNDP created a similar system
called SURF (Evers, Kaiser, and Mu ¨ller 2009).
The knowledge management credo placed much hope in modern ICTs.
However, ICTs have been invoked for development in many different ways:
/C15development-related knowledge can be transferred via the internet or
satellite, ‘‘at virtually no cost’’ (World Bank 1998, 130);
/C15ICT will bridge the digital divide between the ‘‘information rich’’
and the ‘‘information poor’’ in order to instruct the information poor
and empower their civil society and;
/C15ICT as instrument or as economic good in the knowledge economy.
The first has been discussed before in the context of knowledge manage-
ment. The second and third usually constitute the ‘‘ICT for Development’’
(ICT4D) paradigm. The ICT4D sector has an ambiguous relationship with
technological determinism. Mansell (2011) claims that the grand ICT4D784 Science, Technology, & Human Values 39(6)
theories of the UN and World Bank rely on ICT as an exogenous factor for
development. Although the 2001 Human Development Report (UNDP
2001) stated that ICT ‘‘enable development’’ because technological innova-
tion and development are ‘‘mutually reinforcing, creating a virtuous circle’’
(UNDP 2001, 28), Avgerou (2003) finds that the report emphasizes by and
large only one side of that virtuous circle: that ICT innovation will generate
development.
The hopes for the ICT4D sector are high, but many projects fail. The
literature on ICT in developing countries has accumulated a substantial
amount of qualitative data that confirms the situated manner in which
ICT4D projects need to take shape (Avgerou 2003). Practice-based
approaches in the field show that ICT can play an endogenous role in devel-
opment but such initiatives cannot adequately bridge power inequalities
(Mansell 2011).
Throughout the 1990s, the capacity-building paradigm emerged as an
important opposition to any practice of deterministic K&T transfers in
development—TA in particular. From the 1940s through the 1970s, TA had
exclusively relied on the employment of Western experts, and its failure
was no longer ignorable by the end of the eighties. Criticism to TA was
growing within the major development organizations themselves (for an
overview, see Fukuda-Parr, Lopes, and Malik 2002). A UNDP assessment
report (Berg and Seymour Whitaker 1993) argued that TA had proven
effective in getting the job done, but less effective at developing local insti-
tutions or building local ‘‘capacities’’. Instead, TA had fostered dependence
on foreign experts and had distorted national priorities.
The concept ‘‘capacity building’’ was picked up from this report by
Edward V. K. Jaycox (1993), the Then Vice President of the World Bank’s
Africa section. Berg and Jaycox’s message was that TA had to rely much
more on local expertise, not on foreign experts. In this way, TA would
stimulate and build up the local capacities.
A subsequent UNDP publication (Fukuda-Parr, Lopes, and Malik 2002)
was the real driver for the spread of the capacity-building paradigm in all
development agencies. The document completely rejected TA and proposed
capacity building as the ‘‘new solution to old problems.’’ Fukuda-Parr,
Lopes, and Malik (2002) argued that capacity needs to be developed at three
levels: the individual, the organizational, and the societal. In fact, the
agency of an individual or organization to apply its capacities depends on
the capacities of the society as a whole. In other words, the document
explicitly recognized that knowledge is always embedded in a specific
social context.Cherlet 785
Since the 1990s, the capacity-building paradigm has gained hegemonic
status within development cooperation (Ku ¨hl 2009). It is not surprising that
the concept, which is on the lips of most development actors nowadays, has
acquired multiple and often conflicting meanings (Baser and Morgan 2008;
UNDP 2009).
Discussion
Disentangling the Different Paradigms
The idea that K&T can infinitely cumulate and become infinitely more
complex emerged during enlightenment. Enlightenment also planted the
seed of the idea that the complexity of K&T is endogenous to the increasing
sophistication of societies. This idea matured in the form of social evolu-
tionism, with Western scientific knowledge seen as the expression of the
most advanced evolutionary stage a society could attain. Condorcet,
through the nineteenth-century colonizers, to the League of Nations all
invoked the superiority of Western knowledge and civilization as moral
justification to civilize the ‘‘inferior races.’’
The role that Truman and TA assigned to K&T was radically different: it
had to tackle the economic poverty of the underdeveloped world and har-
ness Western K&T as exogenous tools for the generation of economic
growth. Industrial technology and large infrastructure would generate
economic development. The (scientific) knowledge surrounding these
Western technologies was embodied by the Western experts who were sent
out for TA. There was a heavy focus on the transfer of technologies, but
there were no particular efforts to foster knowledge production in the ben-
eficiary society itself. Knowledge as endogenous factor of development
seemed to be abandoned in favor of material production as endogenous
motor of development.
Since the late 1990s, knowledge has again assumed an endogenous role
in development, as can be deduced from the rise of the development para-
digms related to the knowledge economy, innovation systems, or capacity
building. By extension, other recent paradigms, like ICT4D, harness
technology as an instrument in development rather than goal, and confirm
that the focus is now on knowledge as endogenous factor in development.
Moreover, K&T have been invoked for development with varying inten-
tions . In the pre-Truman era, they were invoked for the civilization of the
colonies. During the 1950s and 1960s, they were invoked for producing
goods and economic growth. In the 1970s, the role of K&T was to alleviate786 Science, Technology, & Human Values 39(6)
poverty. Today K&T are said to empower the people and to reinforce their
capacities, while others see them as the motor in a knowledge economy.
It is important to emphasize that different paradigms for K&T in/for
development have existed alongside each other. Some of these paradigms
are mutually supportive while others convey completely opposite messages.
This is especially true in the first decades of the twentieth century. When
scrutinizing the credo ‘‘ Knowledge for Development ,’’ brought forward
by the 1998/1999 World Development Report (World Bank 1998), we note
that this flag covers a number of different cargoes. It includes elements of
the knowledge economy, innovation systems, knowledge management,
and ICT4D paradigms. UNDP, from its side, also supports ICT4D
and online knowledge management initiatives, but it is also a strong promo-
ter of capacity building. Finally, the genealogy of the third section shows
that at any point in history the reigning paradigm was always contested,
to some minor or larger extent, from inside or outside the authoritative
organizations.
Epistemic and Technological Determinism
As explained previously, the technological determinism ideology ignores
the intense coevolution of technology and society, whereas the epistemic
determinism ideology ignores that all knowledge is situated and embedded
in its particular social context. Apart from the different roles that have been
assigned to K&T in or for development, the degree of epistemic and tech-
nological determinism in the interpretations has also varied widely.
Some paradigms are particularly prone to epistemic and technological
determinism, such as TA, the ICT4D, knowledge management, and knowl-
edge economy paradigms. That does not mean that they are imperatively
deterministic. More and less deterministic views exist along each other.
Table 1 summarizes the roles that have been attributed to K&T in or for
development and gives a rough indication of the degree of epistemic/tech-
nological determinism (ep/tech det):
/C15K&T presented as totally detachable from the social context (indi-
cated as ‘‘total’’);
/C15K&T presented as detachable from the social context, but some
adaptation to the local context is inevitable (indicated as ‘‘high’’);
/C15K&T presented as embedded in the social context, but the paradigm
still relies on the idea that one party can/should learn from the other
(indicated as ‘‘low’’);Cherlet 787
Table 1. The K&T Paradigms and Their Characteristics.
Period Perspective Role of K&T in development Final goalDegree of ep/
tech det
Cent. XVII Enlightenment K&T endogenous Civilize Total
Cent. XIX Evolutionism K&T endogenous Civilize Total
1940s–60s Technical Assistance T exogenous Economic growth Total
1970s Poverty Reduction T exogenous Alleviate poverty Total
Appropriate Technologies T exogenous Alleviate poverty High
S&T for Development K&T exogenous Economic growth Total
Sussex maniphesto K&T endogenous Economic growth Low
1980s Neo-liberalism T exogenous Improve productivity, economic
growthTotal
1990s–2000s New Growth K&T endogenous Economic growth High
Innovation Systems K&T endogenous Economic growth Low
Knowledge Management K endogenous Economic growth, alleviate
poverty, empowermentTotal
ICT4D K&T exogenous or endogenous Economic growth Total
ICT4D K&T exogenous or endogenous Empowerment High
Capacity Building K endogenous Capacity, empowerment Low
Co-learning K endogenous Capacity, empowerment None
Note :C e n t . ¼century; K ¼knowledge; T ¼technology; S ¼science; ICD ¼information and communications technology; ICT4D ¼ICT for development;
ep/tech det ¼epistemic/technological determinism.
788
/C15K&T presented as completely embedded in the social context; trans-
fer makes little sense, as learning and innovation must happen in the
social context (indicated as ‘‘none’’).
Beyond Capacity Building
Little has been said about whose K&T counts. All hegemonic development
paradigms described previously favor Western K&T. Capacity building does
try to harness local expertise in order to build up local capacities, but Wilson
(2007) remarks that capacity building—like TA—still focuses on ‘‘learning
things that are already known by one of the actors.’’ Wilson distinguishes
‘‘learning from’’ and ‘‘learning with.’’ The former still reigns within develop-
ment aid, while there is a need to focus more on the latter. Co-learning para-
digm is inspired by Habermas’ ideal speech situation, where different forms
of knowledge are equally valued as possible sources of creative learning and
new knowledge production (Wilson 2007). Co-learning would be a mode of
cooperation that fully transcends epistemic determinism.
Conclusion
The article shows that epistemic and technological determinism, although
rebutted by historians and social scientists, is still very present in public dis-
courses. The public discourse scrutinized in this article is international
development, for it attributes particular roles to K&T as triggers for devel-
opment in the Global South.
By reexamining four centuries of development thinking, the article
shows that enlightenment shaped the idea that increasingly sophisticated
K&T produce development. This idea was then implanted in the various
civilization aid and development aid paradigms.
The genealogy also shows that the entire history of civilization aid and
development aid is characterized by a long struggle of trying to find the
right role for K&T. From the enlightenment until today many different roles
have been allotted to K&T in or for development: exogenous to develop-
ment, then endogenous; the instrument, and then the goal. K&T are also
invoked for different purposes: for civilizing the ‘‘inferior races,’’ as the
engine of economic development, for poverty alleviation, and for empow-
erment. As a result of this long quest, deterministic and less deterministic
interpretations have alternated each other, often existed along each other,
and have often been repeated. The arguments put forward by the promoters
of capacity building, for instance, bear many similarities to the criticismCherlet 789
issued in the early 1950s against TA, when the latter was still in its phase of
inception.
Covering a vast genealogy of K&T in or for development in a short arti-
cle can only aim at putting the question of technological determinism back
on the agenda of S&T studies. Hopefully the article convincingly showed
that both technological and epistemic determinism are still very much relied
on by public actors, in particular in the field of international development.
Author’s Note
Previous versions of this article have been presented at the biennial conference of
the European Association for the Study of Science and Technology, Trento 2009,
and at the Max Planck workshop on ‘‘Technology, institutions, and development,’’
Jena 2010.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: The research was supported by a doc-
toral fellowship from the Italian Ministry of Education, Universities and Research
(MIUR) and the Special Research Fund (BOF) of Ghent University, Belgium.
Notes
1. ‘‘Development aid’’ and ‘‘development cooperation’’ are used interchangeably in
this article, but they need to be distinguished from ‘‘development.’’ Development
is an ideology about socioeconomic change that (loosely) draws inspiration from
changes occurring in the Western world. Instead, development aid or develop-
ment cooperation can be defined as the actual ensemble of the actors and inter-
actions, financial and material flows, and policies and practices, that aims at
achieving this socioeconomic change.
2. The Sussex Manifesto extensively wields the word ‘‘capability,’’ a concept that
became notorious a decade later through the work of Amartya Sen (1985). In the
Sussex Manifesto, the concept is used only to refer to S&T capabilities.
3. The original text reads, ‘‘Much of the unprecedentedly rapid development of
large parts of the world economy in recent decades is due to advances in technol-
ogy [ ...] These advances can be reproduced for a fraction of the cost borne by
the industrial countries that devise them [ ...]. Often technological knowledge790 Science, Technology, & Human Values 39(6)
isa commodity that can be trade [sic] like many others , but it has some peculia-
rities which [ ...] are frequently used to justify public intervention.’’
References
Anderson, W. 2002. ‘‘Introduction: Postcolonial Technoscience.’’ Social Studies of
Science 32 (5-6): 643–58.
Arndt, H. W. 1987. Economic Development. The History of an Idea . London, Eng-
land: University of Chicago Press.
Avgerou, C. 2003. ‘‘The Link between ICT and Economic Growth in the Discourse
of Development.’’ In Organizational Information Systems in the Context of Glo-
balization , edited by M. Korpela, R. Montealegre, and A. Poulymenakou,
373–86. New York: Springer.
Baser, H., and P. Morgan. 2008. Capacity, Change and Performance. Study report
59B, April 2008 . Maastricht, the Netherlands: European Center for Development
Policy Management.
Berg, R. J., and J. Seymour Whitaker. 1993. Strategies for African development .
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Bijker, W. E. 1995. Of Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs: Toward a Theory of Socio-
technical Change . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Bijker. 2010. ‘‘How is Technology Made? That is the Question !’’Cambridge Jour-
nal of Economics 34 (1): 63–76.
Comte, A. (1830) 1975. Auguste Comte and Positivism: The Essential Writings .
New York: Harper & Row.
Condorcet, Marquis de. 1795. Esquisse d’un tableau historique des progres de
l’esprit human . Paris, France: Agasse.
Cozzens, S. E., S. Gatchair, K.-S. Kim, G. Ordon ˜ez, and A. Supnithadnaporn. 2008.
‘‘Knowledge and Development.’’ In The Handbook of Science and Technology
Studies , edited by E. J. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska, M. Lynch, and J. Wajcman,
787–812. London, England: MIT press.
Descartes, R. 1964-74. Oeuvre de Descartes, rev. edition . Vol. 12. Paris, France:
Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin.
Edquist, C., ed. 1997. Systems of Innovation: Technologies, Institutions, and Orga-
nizations . New York: Pinter.
Escobar, A. 1995. Encountering Development. The Making and Unmaking of the
Third World . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Evers, H. -D., M. Kaiser, and C. Mu ¨ller. 2009. ‘‘Knowledge in Development: Epis-
temic Machineries in a Global Context.’’ ISSJ 60 (195): 55–68.
Ferry, J. 1885. ‘‘Les fondements de la politique colonial.’’ Discours prononce ´a`l a
Chambre des de ´pute´s le 28 juillet 1885. Accessed December 6, 2013. http://
www.assemblee-nationale.fr/histoire/ferry1885.asp.Cherlet 791
Fontenelle, B. le Bovier de. (1688) 1752. Œuvres diverses de M. de Fontenelle,
Tome Quatrie `me. Paris, France: Brunet.
Frank, A. G. 1969. Latin America: Underdevelopment or Revolution. Essays in the
Development of Underdevelopment and the Immediate Enemy . New York:
Monthly Review Press.
Freeman, C. 1982. The Economics of Industrial Innovation . Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Fukuda-Parr, S., C. Lopes, and K. Malik. 2002. Capacity for Development: New
Solutions to Old Problems . London, England: Earthscan Publications.
Haraway, D. 1988. ‘‘Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and
the Privilege of Partial Perspectives.’’ Feminist Studies 14 (3): 575–99.
Headrick, D. R. 2010. Power Over Peoples: Technology, Environments, and West-
ern Imperialism, 1400 to the Present . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hume, D. (1752) 1854. ‘‘Of the Rise and Progress of the Arts and Sciences.’’ In The
Philosophical Works of David Hume , Vol. III, 119–49. Boston: Little, Brown and
Company.
Jaycox, E. V. 1993. ‘‘Capacity Building: The Missing Link in African Development.’’
African-American Institute Conference. African Capacity Building: Effective and
Enduring Partnerships. Reston, May 20, 1993.
King, K., and S. McGrath. 2004. Knowledge for Development? Comparing British,
Japanese, Swedish and World Bank Aid . London, England: Zed Books.
Ku¨hl, S. 2009. ‘‘Capacity Development as the Model for Development Aid Organi-
zations.’’ Development and Change 40 (3): 551–77.
Landes, D. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations . London, England: Abacus.
Mansell, R. 2011. Power and Interests in Information and Communication and
Development: Exogenous and Endogenous Discourses in Contention. Journal
of International Development . Online first. DOI: 10.1002/jid.1805.
McClellan, J. E. III, and H. Dorn 2006. Science and Technology in World History:
An Introduction . Baltimore, MD: JHU Press.
Mehta, L. 2001. ‘‘Commentary. The World Bank and its Emerging Knowledge
Empire.’’ Human Organization 60 (2): 189–96.
Morgan, L. H. 1974 [1877]. Ancient society, or researches in the lines of human
progress from savagery through barbarism to civilization. Gloucester, MA: Peter
Smith.
Murphy, H. M., E. A. McBean, and K. Farahbakhsh. 2009. ‘‘Appropriate Technol-
ogy: A Comprehensive Approach for Water and Sanitation in the Developing
World.’’ Technology in Society 31 (2): 158–67.
Nietzsche, F. (1887) 1967. On the Genealogy of Morals . New York: Random House.
Nolan, R. W. 2002. Development Anthropology: Encounters in the Real World .
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.792 Science, Technology, & Human Values 39(6)
Oudshoorn, N., and T. Pinch. 2008. ‘‘User-technology Relationships: Some Recent
Developments.’’ In The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies , edited by
E. J. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska, M. Lynch, and J. Wajcman, 541–66. London,
England: MIT press.
Owen, D. 1950. ‘‘The United Nations Program of Technical Assistance.’’ Annals of
the American Academy of Political and social Science 270 (1): 109–17.
Rist, G. 1996. Le de ´veloppement. Histoire d’une croyance occidentale . Paris,
France: Presses de Sciences Po.
Romer, P. M. 1993. ‘‘Two Strategies for Economic Development: Using Ideas and
Producing Ideas.’’ Proceedings of the Annual World Bank Conference on Devel-
opment 1992, Supplement to the World Bank Economic Review. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
Ross, E. B. 2003. ‘‘Malthusianism, Capitalist Agriculture, and the Fate of Peasants
in the Making of the Modern World Food System.’’ Review of Radical Political
Economy 35 (4): 437–61.
Schumacher, E. 1973. Small is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if People Mat-
tered . London, England: Blond and Briggs.
Sen, A. 1985. Commodities and Capabilities . Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-
Holland.
Shah, E. 2009. Manifesting utopia: History and philosophy of UN debates on sci-
ence and technology for sustainable development. STEPS Working Paper 25.
Brighton, England: STEPS Centre.
Singer, H., C. Cooper, R. C. Desai, C. Freeman, O. Gish, S. Hill, and G. Oldham.
1970. ‘‘Draft Introductory Statement for the World Plan of Action for the Appli-
cation of Science and Technology to Development.’’ In Science and Technology
for Development: Proposals for the Second Development Decade . Annex II.
New York: United Nations.
Smith, M. R. 1994. ‘‘Technological Determinism in American Culture.’’ In Does
Technology Drive History? The Dilemma of Technological Determinism , edited
by M. R. Smith, and L. Marx, 1–36. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Standke, K. 2006. ‘‘Sixty Years of UN and UNESCO: Science and Technology in
Global Cooperation, the Case of the United Nations and UNESCO.’’ Science and
Public Policy 33 (9): 627–46.
Thompson, C. (2001) ‘‘Situated Knowledge.’’ In International Encyclopedia of the
Social & Behavioral Sciences eds. Smelser N. J. and Baltes, P. B. 15532–37.
Oxford, England: Elsevier.
Truman, H. 1949. Inaugural Address . http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu. Accessed
December 6, 2013.
UN (United Nations). 1951. Measures for the Economic Development of Underde-
veloped Countries . Report by a Group of Experts Appointed by the Secretary-Cherlet 793
General of the United Nations. New York: United Nations, Dept of Social and
Economic Affairs.
UN (United Nations). 1971. World Plan of Action for the Application of Science and
Technology for Development . New York: United Nations.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2009. Capacity Development:
A UNDP Primer . New York: UNDP.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2001. Human Development
Report 2001. Making New Technologies Work for Human Development . New
York: UNDP.
Visvanathan, S. 2001. ‘‘Technology transfer.’’ In International Encyclopedia of the
Social & Behavioral Sciences , (eds). Smelser N. J. and Baltes, P. B. 15532–37.
Oxford: Elsevier.
Wilson, G. 2007. ‘‘Knowledge, Innovation and Re-inventing Technical Assistance
for Development.’’ Progress in Development Studies 7 (3): 183–99.
Wolfensohn, J. (1996). People and development. Address to the Board of Gover-
nors, Washington, DC, October 1, 1996.
Available at http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/
WDSP/IB/2000/02/23/000009265_3970311120231/Rendered/PDF/multi_page.
pdf, Accessed December 6, 2013.
World Bank. 1987. World Development Report 1987 . Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
World Bank. 1998. Knowledge for Development . Oxford, England: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Wyatt, S. 2008. ‘‘Technological Determinism is Dead; Long Live Technological
Determinism.’’ In The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies , edited
by E. J. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska, M. Lynch, and J. Wajcman, 65–180. Lon-
don, England: MIT press.
Author Biography
Jan Cherlet obtained a joint PhD degree from Ghent University and the University
of Bologna. His main interest is in global development policy making.794 Science, Technology, & Human Values 39(6)
Article
Situated Ethics in
Development: STS
Insights for a
Pragmatic Approach
to Development
Policy and Practice
Elizabeth Ransom1,2, Caitlin Grady2,3,
Lauren Trepanier3and Carmen Bain4
Abstract
Technology has played a central role in development programming since
the inception of development assistance. Recent development organiza-
tions, like the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, believe technological
innovation can improve development outcomes. Development ethics, a
field of study focused on the ethical questions posed by development pol-
icies and practices, has yet to fully appreciate the ethical dimensions of the
science and technology. Addressing this important research and policy gap,
we contend that science and technology studies (STS) offers important
1School of International Affairs, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA
2Rock Ethics Institute, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA
3Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, USA
4Department of Sociology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA
Corresponding Author:
Elizabeth Ransom, The Pennsylvania State University, 253 Katz Building, University Park,
PA 16802, USA.
Email: exr497@psu.eduScience, Technology, & Human Values
2023, Vol. 48(1) 190-211
ªThe Author(s) 2021
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/01622439211052685
journals.sagepub.com/home/sth

insights that can be used in combination with development ethics to influ-
ence development policies and practices. Utilizing a case study of a private
development program in Uganda, we illustrate how STS offers important
insights for understanding how a sociotechnical ensemble placed pressure
on already scarce water resources. Two dimensions of STS scholarship, the
power asymmetries of technological development and the incomplete or
partial nature of technoscientific knowledge, are examined and help us to
understand how sociotechnical ensembles in development increase the
likelihood of the emergence of publics who are negatively impacted by
sociotechnical ensembles in development programs. Leveraging STS
insights, we argue for the importance of situated ethics—a pragmatic
approach to ensuring responsiveness to the emergence of these publics.
Keywords
situated ethics, development, Uganda , private development assistance,
Africa
Jonathan is a Ugandan farmer participating in an internationally funded
dairy development program in his community.1Based on the number and
type of dairy cows he owns (five dairy cows—two crossbreeds, three local
breeds), he is considered by the development program personnel to be an
example of someone who has been reasonably successful. Yet, Jonathan
tells us, “We should discuss more the effect of dairy cows on our relation-
ships with our neighbors.” Jonathan continues on to explain that he has
experienced growing tensions with his community because he adopted the
recommended technology, crossbreed dairy cows, encouraged by a devel-
opment program. The crossbreed cows demand significantly more water
than the local breeds, and therefore, to be a “successful” dairy farmer,
Jonathan must take more water. Yet, water is a communal resource and
often scarce in Jonathan’s community. He says, “the fact that I fetch a lot of
water from the community borehole, this has damaged my reputation with
the neighboring community as the community claims that I am wasting their
already scarce water on animals, yet some families go without this water.”
The development program Jonathan referenced was focused on reducing
food insecurity and lifting small holder farmers out of poverty. Yet,
Jonathan’s concerns reveal a development program that failed to innovate
and identify solutions to a significant local problem, not enough water
during the dry season to sustain the community and the developmentRansom et al. 191
program’s technological innovation, crossbreed dairy cows. In this article,
we argue that science and technology studies (STS) offers important
insights that can be used, in combination with development ethics, to influ-
ence not only the policies but also the practices of development to reduce
the likelihood of maldevelopment. In particular, STS insights make a case
for the cultivation of situated ethics—a pragmatic approach to engaging
critically with development in policy and practice in communities.
Science and technology has long been a point of emphasis in develop-
ment assistance programs (Cherlet 2014). Indeed, in the speech that is often
cited as the beginning of “development” President Harry S. Truman (1949)
stated that the United States would “embark on a bold new program for
making the benefits of our scientific advances and industrial progress avail-
able for the improvement and growth of underdeveloped areas.” Despite the
high aspirations expressed in Truman’s speech about development assis-
tance, the results of development programs have been uneven and at times
inhumane for people, animals, and environments in countries disproportio-
nately located in the Global South.2In response to so many failures, the
field of development ethics emerged in the 1970s with the goal of trying to
reduce maldevelopment, where development programs “sacrificed rather
than benefited poor people” (Crocker 2008, 5). However, development
ethicists have rarely considered the ethics of the science and technology
deployed within development programs, instead focusing more broadly on
the overall goals of development. By contrast, STS scholarship can provide
important insights but to date has had limited engagement with develop-
ment scholarship and practice (Khandekar et al. 2017). Specifically, we
highlight two dimensions of STS scholarship—the power asymmetries of
technological innovation and the ways in which technoscientific knowledge
is always incomplete or partial—that can contribute to situated ethics in
development policy and practice.
The following discussion builds our case for situated ethics in develop-
ment by first describing new development actors, many of whom have a
strong belief in the power of technology to provide solutions to intractable
problems. We then briefly elaborate on the history of STS and ethics related
to power asymmetries of technology and gaps in technoscientific knowl-
edge. Our third section, focuses on our case study of a major internationally
funded dairy development program in Uganda. We position this case study
within the existing STS literature and elaborate on the role of situated
ethics. Finally, we bring these works together to call for situated ethics in
development programs by highlighting that technological interventions in
development are embedded within a web of practices, actors, and192 Science, Technology, & Human Values 48(1)
institutions, many of which must change for the technology to successfully
operate.
This article draws on a three-year (2015-17), multimethod research
project investigating the impact of a large, privately funded development
program, the East African Dairy Development (EADD) program, on men
and women smallholders in Uganda. The EADD was initiated and largely
funded (approximately US$68 million over ten years) by the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) as an effort to reduce poverty and food
insecurity by integrating smallholder farmers into dairy value chains and
increasing their incomes. The BMGF is the largest private development
actor active in agriculture. Schurma n (2018) estimates that BMFG has
committed US$4.9 billion to date to agricultural development. The data for
this article are thirty-four farmer interviews (both men and women) and four
focus groups with a total of nineteen farmers divided by gender, and ten key
informant interviews with EADD staff, hub leaders, and extension agents,
along with field notes, as part of a larger, three-year, multimethod (surveys,
GIS data, interviews, focus groups, and observation) study of four EADD
sites in Central and Eastern Uganda. While our case study focuses on the
BMGF, we argue that our conclusions can provide insights for a wide range
of development programs, particularly private development programs.
New Development Actors and a Need
for Development Ethics
Critical insights from STS are all the more important today, as the landscape
of development assistance has shifted, with new organizations that have a
belief in the predominant power of technology to advance development (Gore
2013; Hay and Muller 2013; McGoey 2014; R. Rogers 2015). Traditionally,
development assistance primarily came from official development assistance
(ODA) delivered as bilateral (country to country) or multilateral (interna-
tional governing body, such as, the World Bank, to a country or region) aid.
Today, there is a proliferation of new actors in development assistance,
including countries that historically were the target of development assistance
(e.g., China, India), private foundations, and nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs; Gore 2013). New sources of aid are estimated to have grown to
approximately half of the estimated total ODA (World Bank 2012), with
specific sectors targeted by the new actors. For example, the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation (BMGF) has focused heavily on health and agriculture,
while China, a non-DAC country,3has focused extensively on infrastructure
projects, their so-called belt and road initiative (J.P. 2017).Ransom et al. 193
The increase in private development actors, especially the BMGF, has
led to a growing literature focused on these organizations, which have been
dubbed philanthrocapitalists because of their abiding belief in the effective-
ness of capitalist markets and the positive role of technology in creating
solutions (Fejerskov 2017; R. Rogers 2015). As Fejerskav (2017, 948)
explains, “their philanthropic endeavors are, like their companies, shaped
by logics of the individual, the market, and of societal progress through
technological innovation.” In other words, many of these private donors
bring their business philosophy to the development sector. These organiza-
tions are seen as dictating what should be considered the most reasonable
solutions, with an oversized commitment to technology and markets as
being a part of the solution (N. Banks and Hulme 2014; Jenkins 2011;
Fejerskov 2017). It is within this new context that we argue for a more
robust use of development ethics in development policies and practices,
informed by STS.
Historically, development ethicists have called attention to the ways in
which development institutions and their policies have ethical dimensions
that are rarely acknowledged or are framed in such a way that the ethical
issues are ignored (St. Clair 2010). Development ethics was created to
address “the ethical and value questions posed by development theory,
planning and practice” (Goulet 1989, 5). The motivation of scholars in the
field was and continues to be a desire to create worthwhile development
(Drydyk 2016).
Perhaps one of the best known development ethics frameworks focused
on worthwhile development is the capabilities approach (Nussbaum 2002;
Sen 1999). The capabilities approach, which was integrated into the Human
Development Index, sought to create human-centered development in con-
trast to a narrow economic focus. The goal of the capabilities approach was
to create an “enabling environment for people to enjoy long, healthy, and
creative lives” (Ul Haq 1995, 14). While the capabilities approach is the
best known, there are other development ethics approaches that offer yard-
sticks for trying to prevent maldevelopment. For example, building on the
contributions of the capabilities approach, Drydyk and colleagues identify
seven generally agreed values that contribute to worthwhile development
(Drydyk 2016; Penz, Drydyk, and Bose 2011). These seven include (1)
enhancing well-being, ensuring development is (2) equitable and (3) envir-
onmentally sustainable; (4) involves people’s free participation; (5)
enhances human rights, cultural free dom and (6) social inclusion; and
finally development is done with (7) integrity as opposed to corruptly
(Drydyk 2016).194 Science, Technology, & Human Values 48(1)
However, with few exceptions (see St. Clair 2010; Goulet 1989), the
development ethics literature has not appreciated the ethical dimensions of
the science and technology woven into development programing. Keulartz
et al. (2004) have argued that applied ethics as a field suffers from techno-
logical blindness. We argue this also applies to development ethics. More-
over, while ethical yardsticks are laudable, such approaches fail to
appreciate the dynamic and not fully knowable impact that technologies
in development programming may have on specific communities. In other
words, development programs may at the outset align with the generally
agreed ethics of worthwhile development, but what mechanisms exist to
ensure development in practice does not veer into maldevelopment? STS
scholarship offers key insights that have largely been overlooked by devel-
opment ethicists and practitioners and can contribute to situated ethics that
informs development in policy and practice.
STS and Ethics
Historically, STS scholarship has not focused extensively on the role of ethics
and justice (Mamo and Fishman 2013; Ottinger 2013; Winner 1993). Keu-
lartz et al. (2004, 8) argues the constructivist tendencies in STS, where studies
have “opened the ‘black box’ of technological development,” have at best
been agnostic in their engagement with ethics (also see Winner 1993). STS
can benefit from development ethics, as development ethicists offer a frame-
work for thinking about ethical and just approaches to development. How-
ever, as a field that has deepened our understanding of the social processes
and practices of science and technology, STS provides important insights for
advancing the goals of worthwhile development. As noted at the outset of this
article, we focus on two dimensions of STS scholarship—the power asym-
metries of science and technology innovation and scientific knowledge as
partial and dynamic—that are an important contribution to, and make the
case for, situated ethics in development policy and practice.
Power and Politics of Science and Technology
Many STS scholars have drawn on John Dewey’s ([1927] 1991) idea that
public engagement in politics emerges when there are issues to be debated
(Busch 2009; Driessen and Korthals 2012; Marres 2007). This idea is rel-
evant to technological interventions in development programming. New
technologies can open up issues for societal debate and according to Dries-
sen and Korthals (2012, 797) “generate fresh moral engagements.” WhenRansom et al. 195
technological interventions and innovations occur, affected publics often
emerge because technological change “in many ways is political, but lacks
in transparency (Jasanoff 2003)—something that is deeply problematic”
(Dreissen and Korthals 2012, 799). In part, what contributes to the politics
of science and technology are the extreme power imbalances between those
who design new technologies and those whose livelihoods are most vulner-
able to technological change (Jasanoff 2016; also see STEPS 2010). Even
across different types of technological transitions, where various actors are
driving technology transitions for global development, politics that give rise
to power asymmetries are ever present (Scoones 2016). Resources and
subsequent resource distribution leveraged for sustainable development
remains a source of unequal power in sociotechnical transitions (Smith,
Stirling, and Berkhout 2005). Similarly, development projects, the mechan-
ism through which many new technologies are introduced to communities,
are often political but lack transparency. To be clear, we are not speaking
metaphorically, comparing technological innovation to development pro-
grams, rather we are arguing that mo st development programs contain
technological innovation(s), and both tend to be political but lacking in
transparency. Such situations increase the likelihood of the emergence of
publics impacted by these changes. If there are no opportunities for the
concerns of these publics to be addressed in the midst of a development
project, even a project that began within the sphere of worthwhile devel-
opment may veer into maldevelopment.
While technological interventions in development programs may not
seem novel to development staff, a failure to appreciate that “technological
artifacts embody particular options an d restrictions: they invite certain
kinds of action or behavior and discourage other ones, and thus reinforce
or alter existing role divisions and power structures” (Keulartz et al. 2004,
10) can contribute to the failure of a program and/or maldevelopment. In
other words, technological interventions are usually situated or embedded
within a web of practices, actors, and institutions that are necessary for the
successful operation of the technology. This embeddedness has also been
referred to as the coherence of sociotechnical ensembles or networks (Bij-
ker 1997; Callon and Law 1989). The web within which technologies in
development programs are embedded is woven with power asymmetries.
Scientific Knowledge Gaps
The power asymmetries within sociotechnical ensembles influence whose
knowledge is considered legitimate throughout the course of a development196 Science, Technology, & Human Values 48(1)
program. Feminist philosophers of science were the first to identify that
science tends to privilege certain types of knowledge and is often delimited
to a very narrow set of research questions (Haraway 1988; Harding 1991).
Drawing on the works of feminist scholars in a wide range of disciplines
who emphasized that a person’s understanding of the world—their stand-
point—was shaped by the person’s particular location in the social structure
(Ferguson 1998; Smith 1990), Harding (1991) argued that science should be
grounded in women’s lives (and other marginalized perspectives), as these
perspectives will generate different questions for research. Arguing against
too narrow a focus on identity politics and knowledge production, Haraway
articulated the idea of situated knowledge in science studies (Haraway
1988, 1991; Prins 1995). Specifically, she argued that “all forms of knowl-
edge reflect the particular conditions in which they are produced, and at
some level reflect the social identities and social locations of knowledge
producers” (A. Rogers, Castree, and Kitchin 2013, n.p.).
Subsequent STS scholars have written extensively about the limits of
scientific knowledge, with an emphasis on who defines research questions
and what types of information are co nsidered legitimate. For instance,
Jasanoff (2016) has highlighted that formal risk assessments of new tech-
nologies tends to exclude pragmatic knowledge, choosing to rely on nar-
rowly crafted expert knowledge. In the case of chemicals, risk assessments
tend to focus on product-by-product risk assessments and does not attend to
“synergistic effects” of exposure to multiple chemicals (Jasanoff 2016, 55).
These effects often disproportionately impact poorer and marginalized
communities that are home to hazardous industries—creating a toxic brew
of environmental injustice.
Specific to development, the types of knowledge that are valued in
development programming often ignore other forms of knowledge, partic-
ularly traditional knowledge. In the context of a developing country focused
on water infrastructure, Bauchspies (2012) argues there is a tendency to
assume “modern” water infrastructure is better by global policy makers. By
contrast in her case study in Guinea, she found that community members
utilize a combination of traditional and “modern” technologies to manage
household water access (Bauchspies 2012). Moreover, communities’ and
individuals’ innovative solutions were necessary for meeting the water
needs of community members that went unmet by modern water infrastruc-
ture. Bauchspies (2012, 402) concludes that if these local innovations had
the same “recognition and resources” as “modern” water infrastructure,
they “might just be able to do what ‘modern’ piped water infrastructure
failed to do.”Ransom et al. 197
Beyond privileging spec ific types of knowledge, STS scholars have
called attention to the dynamic nature of technoscientific knowledge. What
is considered a good technological solution today, will likely appear ana-
chronistic within less than a few decades, if not sooner (Ottinger 2013).
There are a few reasons that the dynamism of knowledge production sur-
rounding science and technology is particularly relevant to development
programs. First, who defines the problems, and therefore the solutions,
matters within development schemes. The scope of a program is often
defined by people who are removed from the day-to-day lives of the com-
munities that the program seeks to engage (N. Banks and Hulme 2014;
Jenkins 2011; Williamson 2010). Even within more participatory develop-
ment programs, so-called bottom-up approaches, who participates in the
targeted communities is not random. In their review of over 500 studies on
participatory development, Mansuri and Rao (2013, 5) found participants
were disproportionately wealthier, more educated, higher social status,
more politically connected, and male. To summarize, whether top-down
or bottom-up, who defines the problems to be solved in development pro-
grams shapes the types of scientific and technological solutions brought to
bear on the program. As Hess (2007, 22) has argued, the “resources to water
and weed the garden of knowledge” tend to be provided by political and
economic elites, which means science and technology development is often
“consistent with the goals of political and economic elites.” Overtime, this
contributes to “the systematic non-production of knowledge,” whereby
other issues or areas of inquiry are completely ignored (Frickel et al.
2010, 446).
Second, recognizing the dynamism of technoscientific knowledge in
development suggests that neither development program staff nor partici-
pants involved in the program can fully know the impact or outcomes of
adopting new technologies. Although focused on environmental justice,
Ottinger’s (2013) insights are equally relevant to thinking about develop-
ment programming and the participants who are enrolled. She writes, “the
changing landscape of knowledge calls into question the idea that consent
or participation during one decision-making process can by itself constitute
procedural justice” (Ottinger 2013, 251). Rather we argue development
projects must provide opportunities for “proactive knowledge production
to fill in knowledge gaps” and ongoing opportunities for communities or
publics to emerge and enter into debate (Ottinger 2013, 251).
In summary, STS allows us to better understand that sometimes the
people most affected by a new technology only emerge as publics once the
technology is put in place. This is because technological interventions may198 Science, Technology, & Human Values 48(1)
negatively impact people or their communities, who rarely have had input
into the development of these technologies. Moreover, the knowledge sur-
rounding technological interventions is inevitably partial. Much like publics
who come into existence when there are issues to be debated, technoscien-
tific knowledge is dynamic and open to revision. Relevant knowledge may
not yet be known or recognized at the outset of a development program.
Yet, the ability to respond to the emergence of publics and integrate new
knowledge can be the difference between a development program that is
ethical and just or one that veers into maldevelopment.
Technological Interventions in a Development
Program
The goal of EADD was to incorporate smallholder farmers into dairy
value chains and cooperatives as a means for reducing poverty by
increasing farmer incomes (EADD 2008). A key mechanism to achieve
this transformation was the technological intervention of crossbreed
dairy cows that can produce more milk than local breeds. For example,
local breeds may only provide a ho usehold one to two liters per day of
milk, whereas a Jersey crossbreed c an provide ten to twelve liters per
day but requires that th e crossbreed is given significantly more water.
The crossbreed cows were embedded in a web of changes to practices,
actors, and institutions, that is, a s ociotechnical ensemble that must
cohere for the technology—and by im plication the smallholders—to
be successful.
With Heifer International as the lead agency, the project was implemen-
ted in two phases: Phase I (2008-13) included Uganda, Kenya, and
Rwanda and Phase II (2014-18) included Uganda, Kenya, and Tanzania.
The BMGF funded Phase I through a US$42.8 million grant and Phase II
through a US$25.5 million grant, of which Uganda received US$10.9 mil-
lion in Phase II (World Agroforestry 2014). This project had many dimen-
sions, including advocating smallholders to adopt crossbreed dairy cows,
accompanied by support structures such as veterinary services for artificial
insemination (AI) and the treatment of sick animals, and institutional
change. In Uganda, the institutional change involved targeting 43,000 dairy
farmers, who were then organized into thirty-three dairy producer organi-
zations or “hubs.”
The multidimensional transformations required of smallholders partici-
pating in this program is demonstrated in a newsletter from a project staff
member early on in the program, when he explained:Ransom et al. 199
The farmers’ attitude is very important in implementation of EADD. This is
in the sense that if the farmers are not ready to play their roles religiously,
EADD cannot do everything for them. In the pastoral areas, farmers are slow
to change the way they are doing things, including slow adoption of AI and
rearing more beneficial breeds in terms of milk production. (EADD 2009, 11)
In this passage, it is made clear that farmers not only must change their
attitude, but the types of technologies they adopt (AI to produce beneficial
breeds) to be successful. Not stated explicitly, but very much a part of the
program is that smallholders must also change how they farm. Smallholders
were asked to no longer put their dairy cow in the field but instead move the
animal to a confined stall where feed and water are brought to the animal.
This creates more work for smallholders and their household members but
is intended to increase the amount of milk produced.
Emergence of Publics—Water Scarcity
The embeddedness of the technological intervention of improved dairy
breeds—requiring a series of changes to practices, actors, and institutions—
invited “certain kinds of action or behavior” and discouraged others (Keu-
lartz et al. 2004, 10). This contributed to the emergence of impacted publics
surrounding the changes brought about by this project. A salient issue of
contestation that arose repeatedly in interviews, and we argue represents an
“emergence of publics” in this development project, was the issue of water
scarcity. There was a lack of response by project staff to the issue of water
scarcity, as it did not fall directly within the development program’s official
scope. Although the issue is clearly directly relevant to the project, water
scarcity did not receive subsequent attention or action. The lack of engage-
ment on what was clearly an important , potentially life-altering issue
reveals there is a need for situated ethics to consider how such an important
concern can be addressed.
All but one of the interviewed smallholders spoke about the problem of
water scarcity in their villages. They spoke about the distance to water
sources and lack of adequate access to enough water during the dry season.
Paul, one of the Ugandan smallholder farmers we interviewed, typifies the
sentiment among many of the smallholders. He states, “finding adequate
water for the dairy cows is my biggest challenge; water is very far from my
household (3 kms) and we spend a lot of time fetching water for the dairy
cows” (Paul, 414, unpublished interview). For the majority of rural Ugan-
dans, community boreholes (also called hand-pump wells or tube wells) are200 Science, Technology, & Human Values 48(1)
the most common source of clean drinking water (approximately 44 percent
coverage), but access varies widely and demand for additional boreholes
remains high (DWD 2017; Sloots 2010).
As the dry season progresses the lines of people at the boreholes get
longer, and some boreholes run dry as the groundwater table falls below the
depth of the well. Lack of water leads to competition and sometimes vio-
lence. In a women-only smallholder focus group (FG) discussion, Dembe
(FG1) stated, “In this zone we have many people and many animals, but we
have only one borehole. Here water is for fighting. If you want water free
[from conflict], you have to go at night [1-3 a.m.].” The tension over
insufficient water increased among community members when some people
were collecting water to give to their cows. In another focus group, Susan
(FG2), observed that “when the people know you are collecting a lot of
water for animals, they start complaining and so you never get enough.” In
the same focus group, Ruth (FG2) said “some people think animals don’t
deserve water before humans.”
In talking with project staff, they were aware of the problem of the dry
season, but they did not directly engage with concerns of smallholders or
community members about a lack of enough water in the community.
Neither did they reconsider the technology itself, crossbreed dairy cows,
which require more water than local breeds. Indirectly, project staff recog-
nized the challenges of the dry season for raising dairy cows, but they never
directly questioned the sustainability or ethics of intensifying milk produc-
tion in water insecure communities. Sarah (2017, unpublished interview), a
staff member from a partner NGO providing support to EADD, explained
that EADD encouraged farmers to grow better livestock feed in the form of
higher protein grasses, legumes, fodder shrubs, “most of which are drought
tolerant [emphasis added],” as opposed to simply having the cows graze on
whatever grasses are available. She continued on to say though, that “water
is the most essential feed. I don’t know why the project didn’t consider this.
The amount of water affects production [of milk] and reproduction” (Sarah
2017). Sarah also pointed out that EADD’s efforts to encourage farmers to
grow more pasture for silage to feed cows during the dry season means that
cows actually need to drink more water, as they are getting less moisture
from the food. In other words, encouraging a silage system to offset drought
actually increases the need for water for the cow. Sarah repeated again in
our interview, “The project did not consider water, but it’s the biggest
issue.”
In terms of solutions, when smallholders were asked during our inter-
views what they thought should be done, most of the respondents said theRansom et al. 201
project or the government should provide more water through drilling more
boreholes or building dams. In contrast, when we asked project staff, most
thought the farmers should be responsible for securing water. Charles, the
regional project staff member said, “We encourage farmers to have water
tanks, even a small one, whatever they can afford.” But not all staff agreed.
Sarah observed that most additional water sources (e.g., drilling another
borehole, building dams) are too expensive for farmers, including water
tanks. Moreover, she noted that, “you can find farmers with water tanks
who no longer have enough water in the tank for the cows and they are only
two months into the dry season.”
This development program was in the final two years of a ten-year time
line. As such, we observed publics that emerged in response to changes
brought about by the insertion of more water intensive dairy cows. Specif-
ically, smallholders with crossbreed cows and community members not
enrolled in the program, but in need of water during the dry season emerged
as publics impacted by the project. Interestingly, Sarah, who can see the
tension and conflict of these emergent publics, began working on this
project later and she was employed by another partner NGO, not EADD,
the implementing NGO. Aside from clearly being an astute observer, Sarah
likely benefited from her outsider/insider status (Adu-Ampong and Adams
2020; Giwa 2015) in recognizing these emergent publics.
A Role for Situated Ethics
An issue of contestation around which publics emerged during the course of
this development program were community disputes when there was not
enough water for both community members and animals during the dry
season. While project staff were aware of the problem, the staff did not
respond or adapt the project to engage with the issue of water scarcity.
Technically, the issue of water was outside the scope of this large devel-
opment project, even though it could impact its success. This issue is also
ethically problematic, as technically smallholders could be successful in the
program, but at the expense of other household or community members
well-being. Simultaneously, project staff, even when they were aware of the
problem, did not respond. The lack of response may have been due to
limited resources, lack of political influence, a need to assure funders that
the program was “successful,” or a combination of all three. The cause of
the lack of a response misses the broader point. Rather we argue, situated
ethics informed by STS offers an opportunity for a more robust response to
development in policy and practice, ideally reducing the likelihood of202 Science, Technology, & Human Values 48(1)
maldevelopment. Through increasing opportunities for community dialo-
gue, there is also the possibility that these communities can find common
ground and agitate for change from people and agencies that generally have
more power, that is, government personnel or development funders.
The concept of situated ethics dates back to Aristotle (phronˆ esis; Kraut
2018) and has been applied to a wide range of topics, including research
methods (Ebrahim 2010; Estalella and Ard` evol 2007; Perez 2019), ethical
decision-making in occupations, like home healthcare nurses and social
work (S. Banks 2016; Gremmen 1999), and by feminists’ scholars (Fergu-
son 1998; Ong 2011). S. Banks (2016, 35) in her study of social work offers
the definition that situated ethics “places dilemmas and decisions in a
broader social, political and cultural context and sees responsibility in a
wider, more relational sense, beyond the isolated individual decision-
maker.” Banks definition is a starting point, but like development ethics,
suffers from technological blindness. In STS, scholars have referenced the
“situatedness of local knowledge” (Ottinger 2013, 260), a “situated, spec-
ulative justice” (Reardon 2013, 188), and “situated communities” (McHugh
2011), all of which are building on earlier feminist STS scholars admon-
ishment of traditional scientific epistemological approaches that take a
view-from-nowhere (Haraway 1988). While the concepts in STS do vary,
we propose a core idea relevant to situated ethics—it is a pragmatic
approach to ensuring responsiveness to the emergence of publics who are
impacted by sociotechnical ensembles.
Concepts across situated ethics literature share some complementary
lenses with concepts from sustainable development theory, particularly
sociotechnical transitions and socio-ecological system resilience. Socio-
ecological systems can utilize a place-based structure to bound the system
and coordinate governance though insufficient attention to power relations
and stakeholder interests complicate the practical implementation of prag-
matic place-based frameworks (Smith and Stirling 2010). Multilevel per-
spective on sociotechnical transitions can help organize analyses into a
sociotechnical system with nested hierarchical components including
niches, regimes, and landscapes to help uncover the power and political
aspects of technology transition (Smith, Voß, and Grin 2010). While these
concepts are theoretically informative to the research community evaluat-
ing complexities of power and technology across development, implement-
ing these frameworks in the case of a program such as EADD would be
impossible without more pragmatic solutions.
There are many potential avenues f or developing situated ethics
informed by STS, but for our purpose, the works of Keulartz and colleaguesRansom et al. 203
(Keulartz and Schermer 2014; Keulartz et al. 2004) help us to envision
situated ethics in development. Utilizing pragmatism, particularly Ameri-
can pragmatism (i.e., Dewey, Rorty), Keulartz and Schermer (2014, 288)
emphasize that pragmatism’s primary concern is “to facilitate the solving of
problems and the settlement of conflicts” that emerge out of activities and
practices in order to improve cooperation and peaceful cohabitation even
while living in pluralistic societies.
Sociotechnical ensembles in development can bring to light “deep-
seated and fundamental value conflicts,” which in our case study is best
captured by the tension over who or what should be prioritized when water
is scarce, people with limited resources for accessing water or cows (Keu-
lartz et al. 2004, 22). With the introduction of new technologies in devel-
opment programming, pragmatism encourages a recognition that constant
social and moral learning is required (Keulartz and Schermer 2014). In our
case study, the lack of enough water for the community was exacerbated by
the development project. From a pragmatist perspective “dealing with
emerging problems can benefit from a multitude of visions and
perspectives” in order to increase the chances of finding an effective and
rational solution (Keulartz and Schermer 2014, 288). However, a multitude
of perspectives can also be unproductive, which is why there is a focus on
particular methods within pragmatism for working toward cooperation and
consensus building, specifically gradualization and common-ground dialo-
gue. In both instances, the EADD development program needed to allow
opportunities for local communities to participate prior to the commence-
ment of the project, at the point of implementation, and throughout the
duration of the project to discuss emergent issues.
There are several methods to pursue what Dewey (1948) called recon-
structive thinking, whereby the goal is to build shared ideas and commu-
nities. One proposed method for reconstructive thinking is the use of
gradualization, whereby you encourage affected parties to think in terms
of degrees rather than boundaries (Keulartz and Schermer 2014; Keulartz
et al. 2004). Instead of viewing something as good or bad, participants are
encouraged to consider solutions that are situated between the extremes. In
this case, as tensions grew among community members over whether ani-
mals deserved access to the limited water supply, gradualization allows for
a discussion among community members, smallholder farmers and project
staff about the types (e.g., species and breeds), and total number of animals’
community members think is reasonable given the amount of water avail-
able to the community. Or how community members, or even government
officials, might work together to increase access to other water sources.204 Science, Technology, & Human Values 48(1)
Such an approach also allows for the possibility that a development pro-
gram can adapt to problems that were not previously anticipated. This
means development program planners must plan for ongoing opportunities
for engagement, as opposed to only planning for the preliminary meetings
that occur at the outset of a project.
Another method is referred to as common-ground groups or dialogue
(Keulartz et al. 2004, 24). The idea is that groups leave their core commit-
ments off the table and search for areas and issues where they find some
kind of agreement. For example, community members might come to an
agreement that there is an increased availability of milk, yogurt, and ghee in
the community due to the development project and this has benefited all
households, not only households that own crossbreed dairy cows. It is
beyond the scope of our discussion and our imagination to hypothesize
what would be the outcomes of situated ethics in a development project.
Rather we offer a vision of why situated ethics might work within devel-
opment programming.
Conclusions
A call for situated ethics in development programs emerges out of a rec-
ognition that technological interventions in development are embedded
within a web of practices, actors, and institutions, many of which must
change for the technology to successfully operate. As our case study illu-
strated, power asymmetries, incomplete technoscientific knowledge in the
program planning, and inequitable impacts of technological interventions
mean that the emergence of impacted publics are likely. As such, situated
ethics is necessary to understand areas of contestation between and among
publics and for development organizations to more intentionally engage
with avenues of resolution. While our discussion has focused on one spe-
cific development project, science and technology have long been a point of
emphasis in development assistance and this trend is continuing with the
entrance of new development actors. There is a role for STS insights in
shaping development policy and practice.
The field of development is littered with stories of development pro-
grams that have failed. Therefore, scholars, policy makers, and organiza-
tions should be open to considering situated ethics in development practice.
Situated ethics can be a mechanism of dealing with the complexity of
development in practice. Malavisi (2014, 298) observes that “development
needs an ethics that is both critical and practical.” Situated ethics with
insights from STS scholars can help in providing an ethics that is bothRansom et al. 205
critical and practical, while advancing the values of worthwhile develop-
ment. The critical reflexivity of situated ethics provides an important tool
for development practitioners to engage with publics and identify areas for
reenactment.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the farmers who took the time to participate in our
research, the staff of the EADD/Heifer Uganda office, and research associates of
Uganda for their assistance with fieldwork. The authors would also like to thank the
anonymous reviewers and the editor and associate editor of the journal for their
valuable feedback on earlier drafts of this manuscript.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: Funding for this project was provided
by the National Science Foundation, Sociology Program, Division of Social and
Economic Sciences, Directorate of Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences,
award number 1458989.
ORCID iD
Elizabeth Ransom https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9608-2914
Notes
1. All names have been changed to protect the identities of individuals.
2. Global South refers to countries that have lower levels of per capita income,
investment in healthcare and education, investments in infrastructure, and gov-
ernance capabilities.
3. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Devel-
opment Assistance Committee (DAC) is an international forum of thirty coun-
tries that regularly reports development assistance activities, thereby creating
more transparency than other sources of aid.
References
Adu-Ampong, E. A., and E. A. Adams. 2020. “‘But You Are also Ghanaian, You
Should Know’: Negotiating the Insider–Outsider Research Positionality in the
Fieldwork Encounter.” Qualitative Inquiry 26 (2020): 583-92.206 Science, Technology, & Human Values 48(1)
Banks, Nicola, and David Hulme. 2014. “New Development Alternatives or Busi-
ness as Usual with a New Face? The Transformative Potential of New Actors and
Alliances in Development AU.” Third World Quarterly 35 (1): 181-95.
Banks, Sarah. 2016. “Everyday Ethics in Professional Life: Social Work as Ethics
Work.” Ethics and Social Welfare 10 (1): 35-52.
Bauchspies, Wenda K. 2012. “The Community Water Jar: Gender and Technology
in Guinea.” Journal of Asian and African Studies 47 (4): 392-403.
Bijker, Wiebe E. 1997. Of Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs: Toward a Theory of
Sociotechnical Change . Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Busch, Lawrence. 2009. “What Kind of Agriculture? What Might Science Deliver?”
Natures Sciences Soci ´et´es17 (3): 241-47.
Callon, Michel, and John Law. 1989. “On the Construction of Sociotechnical Net-
works: Content and Context Revisited.” Knowledge and Society: Studies in the
Sociology of Science Past and Present 8 (1989): 57-83.
Cherlet, Jan. 2014. “Epistemic and Technological in Determinism in Development
Aid.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 39 (6): 773-94.
Crocker, David A. 2008. Ethics of Global Development: Agency, Capability, and
Deliberative Democracy . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Dewey, John. 1948. Reconstruction in Philosophy . Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Dewey, John. (1927) 1991. The Public and its Problems . Athens: Swallo Press/Ohio
University Press.
Driessen, Clemens, and Michiel Korthals. 2012. “Pig Towers and In Vitro Meat:
Disclosing Moral Worlds by Design.” Social Studies of Science 42 (6):
797-820.
Drydyk, Jay. 2016. “Ethical Issues in Development.” In The Palgrave Handbook of
International Development , edited by J. Grugel and D. Hammett, 55-76. London,
UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
DWD (Directorate of Water Development). 2017. Uganda Water Supply Atlas:
Uganda National Report . Edited by Ministry of Water & Environment
(MWE) and Directorate of Water Deve lopment (DWD). Kampala, Uganda:
DWD.
EADD (East African Dairy Development). 2008. “EADD Uganda Newsletter No. 1.”
In East Africa Dairy Development Project . Nairobi, Kenya: EADD. https://cgspa
ce.cgiar.org/bitstream/handle/10568/2447/EADD%20Uganda%20Newsletter%20
Issue1.pdf?sequence=1
EADD (East African Dairy Development). 2009. “EADD Uganda Newsletter No. 2.”
In East Africa Dairy Development Project . Nairobi, Kenya: EADD. https://cgspa
ce.cgiar.org/bitstream/handle/10568/2 448/Newsletter%20%20March09.pdf?se
quence=1&isAllowed=yRansom et al. 207
Ebrahim, Hasina Banu. 2010. “Situated Ethics: Possibilities for Young Children as
Research Participants in the South African Context.” Early Child Development
and Care 180 (3): 289-98.
Estalella, Adolfo, and Elisenda Ard` evol. 2007. “Field Ethics: Towards Situated
Ethics for Ethnographic Research on the Internet.” Forum Qualitative Sozial-
forschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research 8 (3): Article 2.
Fejerskov, Adam Moe. 2017. “The New Technopolitics of Development and the
Global South as a Laboratory of Tec hnological Experimentation.” Science,
Technology, & Human Values 42 (5): 947-68.
Ferguson, Ann. 1998. “Resisting the Veil of Privilege: Building Bridge Identities as
an Ethico-politics of Global Feminisms.” Hypatia 13 (3): 95-113.
Frickel, Scott, Sahra Gibbon, Jeff Howard, Joanna Kempner, Gwen Ottinger, and
David J. Hess. 2010. “Undone Science: Charting Social Movement and Civil
Society Challenges to Research Agenda Setting.” Science, Technology, &
Human Values 35 (4): 444-73.
Giwa, A. 2015. “Insider/Outsider Issues for Development Researchers from the
Global South.” Geography Compass 9 (6): 316-26.
Gore, Charles. 2013. “The New Development Cooperation Landscape: Actors,
Approaches, Architecture.” Journal of International Development 25 (6): 769-86.
Goulet, Denis. 1989. The Uncertain Promise: Value Conflicts in Technology Trans-
fer. New York: New Horizons Press.
Gremmen, Ine. 1999. “Visiting Nurses’ S ituated Ethics: Beyond ‘Care Versus
Justice’.” Nursing Ethics 6 (6): 515-27.
Haraway, Donna. 1988. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism
and the Privilege of Partial Perspective.” Feminist Studies 14 (3): 575-99.
Haraway, Donna. 1991. Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature .
New York: Routledge.
Harding, Sandra. 1991. Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Thinking from
Women’s Lives . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Hay, Iain, and Samantha Muller. 2013. “Questioning Generosity in the Golden Age
of Philanthropy.” Progress in Human Geography 38 (5): 635-53.
Hess, David J. 2007. Alternative Pathways in Science and Industry . Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
J.P. 2017. “What is China’s Belt and Road Initiative? The Many Motivations Behind
Xi Jinping’s Key Foreign Policy.” The Economist . https://www.economist.com/
the-economist-explains/2017/05/14/what-is-chinas-belt-and-road-initiative
Jasanoff, Sheila. 2003. “Technologies of Humility: Citizen Participation in Govern-
ing Science.” Minerva 41 (3): 223-44.
Jasanoff, Sheila. 2016. The Ethics of Invention: Technology and the Human Future .
New York: W. W. Norton & Company.208 Science, Technology, & Human Values 48(1)
Jenkins, Garry W. 2011. “Who’s Afraid of Philanthrocapitalism.” Case Western
Reserve Law Review 61 (3): 753-822.
Keulartz, Jozef, and Maartje Schermer. 2014. “A Pragmatist Approach to the Gov-
ernance of Vulnerability.” In Vulnerability in Technol ogical Cultures: New
Directions in Research and Governance , edited by Anique Hommels, Jessica
Mesman, and Wiebe E. Bijker, 285-304. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keulartz, Jozef, Maartje Schermer, Michiel Korthals, and Tsjalling Swierstra. 2004.
“Ethics in Technological Culture: A Programmatic Proposal for a Pragmatist
Approach.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 29 (1): 3-29.
Khandekar, Aalok, Koen Beumer, Annapurna Mamidipudi, Pankaj Sekhsaria, and
Wiebe E. Bijker. 2017. “STS for Development.” In The Handbook of Science
and Technology Studies , edited by Ulrike Felt, Rayvon Fouch´ e, Clark A. Miller,
and Laurel Smith-Doerr, 665-93. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kraut, Richard. 2018. “Aristotle’s Ethics.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philo-
sophy (Summer 2018 edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta. Accessed August 15,
2021. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2018/entries/aristotle-ethics/
Malavisi, Anna. 2014. “The Need for an Effective Development Ethics.” Journal of
Global Ethics 10 (3): 297-303.
Mamo, Laura, and Jennifer R. Fishman. 2013. “Why Justice? Introduction to the
Special Issue on Entanglements of Science, Ethics, and Justice.” Science, Tech-
nology, & Human Values 38 (2): 159-75.
Mansuri, Ghazala, and Vijayendra Rao. 2013. Localizing Development: Does Par-
ticipation Work? Washington, DC: World Bank.
Marres, Noortje. 2007. “The Issues Deserve More Credit: Pragmatist Contributions
to the Study of Public Involvement in Controversy.” Social Studies of Science 37
(5): 759-80.
McGoey, Linsey. 2014. “The Philanthropic State: Market–State Hybrids in the
Philanthrocapitalist Turn.” Third World Quarterly 35 (9): 109-25.
McHugh, Nancy Arden. 2011. “More than Skin Deep: Situated Communities and
Agent Orange in the Aluoi Valley, Vietnam.” In Feminist Epistemology and
Philosophy of Science , edited by Heidi Grasswick, 183-203. New York: Springer.
Nussbaum, Martha. 2002. “Capabilities and Social Justice.” International Studies
Review 4 (2): 123-35.
Ong, Aihwa. 2011. “Translating Gender Justice in Southeast Asia: Situated Ethics,
NGOs, and Bio-welfare.” Hawwa 9 (1): 26-48.
Ottinger, Gwen. 2013. “Changing Knowledge, Local Knowledge, and Knowledge
Gaps.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 38 (2): 250-70.
Penz, Peter, Jay Drydyk, and Pablo S. Bose. 2011. Displacement by Development:
Ethics, Rights and Responsibilities . Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University
Press.Ransom et al. 209
Perez, Teresa Sandra. 2019. “In Support of Situa ted Ethics: Ways of Building Trust with
Stigmatised ‘Waste Pickers’ in Cape Town.” Qualitative Research 19 (2): 148-63.
Prins, Baukje. 1995. “The Ethics of Hybrid Subjects: Feminist Constructivism Accord-
ing to Donna Haraway.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 20 (3): 352-67.
Reardon, Jenny. 2013. “On the Emergence of Science and Justice.” Science, Tech-
nology, & Human Values 38 (2): 176-200.
Rogers, Alisdair, Noel Castree, and Ro b Kitchin. 2013. “Situated Knowledge.” A
Dictionary of Human Geography . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
https://www.oxfordr eference.com/view/ 10.1093/acref/9780199599868.00
1.0001/acref-9780199599868
Rogers, Robin. 2015. “Why the Social Sciences Should Take Philanthropy Seri-
ously.” Society 52 (6): 533-40.
Schurman, Rachel. 2018. “Micro(soft) Managing a ‘Green Revolution’ for Africa:
The New Donor Culture and International Agricultural Development.” World
Development 112 (12): 180-92.
Scoones, Ian. 2016. “The Politics of Sustainability and Development.” Annual
Review of Environment and Resources 41 (1): 293-319.
Sen, Amartya K. 1999. Development as Freedom . Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Sloots, Ron. 2010. Assessment of Groundwater Investigations and Borehole Drilling
Capacity in Uganda . In The Republic of Uganda Ministry of Water and Envi-
ronment (MWE) & UNICEF. Kampala, Uganda: UNICEF.
Smith, Adrian, and Andy Stirling. 2010. “The Politics of Social-ecological Resilience
and Sustainable Socio-technical Transitions.” Ecology and Society 15 (1): 1-11.
Smith, Adrian, Andy Stirling, and Frans Berkhout. 2005. “The Governance of
Sustainable Socio-technical Transitions.” Research Policy 34 (10): 1491-510.
Smith, Adrian, Jan-Peter Voß, and John Grin. 2010. “Innovation Studies and Sus-
tainability Transitions: The Allure of the Multi-level Perspective and Its Chal-
lenges.” Research Policy 39 (4): 435-48.
Smith, Dorothy E. 1990. The Conceptual Practices of Power: A Feminist Sociology
of Knowledge . Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto Press.
St. Clair, Asunci´ on Lera. 2010. “A Methodologically Pragmatist Approach to
Development Ethics.” In Capabilities, Power, and Institutions , edited by Ste-
phen L. Esquith and Fred Gifford, 359-380. University Park: The Pennsylvania
State University Press.
STEPS. 2010. “Innovation, Sustai nability, Development: A N ew Manifesto.” Accessed
August 15, 2021. https://steps-centre. org/anewmanifesto/manifesto_2010/.
Truman, Harry S. 1949. “Inaugural Address.” In The Avalon Project . New Haven,
CT: Yale Law School. https://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/truman.asp210 Science, Technology, & Human Values 48(1)
Ul Haq, Mahbub. 1995. Reflections on Human Development . Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Williamson, Claudia R. 2010. “Exploring the Failure of Foreign Aid: The Role of
Incentives and Information.” The Review of Austrian Economics 23 (1): 17-33.
Winner, Langdon. 1993. “Upon Opening the Black Box and Finding It Empty:
Social Constructivism and the Philosophy of Technology.” Science, Technology,
& Human Values 18 (3): 362-78.
World Agroforestry. 2014. “The East Africa Dairy Development Project (EADD)
Phase II Launch in Uganda.” World Agroforestry . Accessed August 25, 2020.
http://www.worldagrofore stry.org/news/east-africa-dairy-development-proje
ct-eadd-phase-ii-launch-uganda.
World Bank. 2012. Global Monitoring Report 2012: Food Prices, Nutrition, and the
Millennium Development Goals . Washington, DC: World Bank, International
Monetary Fund.
Author Biographies
Elizabeth Ransom is an interim director and an associate professor in the School of
International Affairs and senior research associate with the Rock Ethics Institute at
the Pennsylvania State University. Trained as a sociologist, her research is situated
at the intersection of agriculture, globalization, and development, with an emphasis
on gender and women’s empowerment and science and technology in the food
system. She has worked in Southern and Eastern Africa, focusing extensively on
livestock production systems, in addition to work in the United States and Australia.
Caitlin Grady is an assistant professor in the Department of Civil and Environ-
mental Engineering and a research associate with the Rock Ethics Institute at the
Pennsylvania State University. Caitlin’s research focuses on developing and deploy-
ing transdisciplinary mixed-methodol ogical approaches to understand complex
socio-environmental systems in Southeast Asia, South America, East Africa, and
the United States.
Lauren Trepanier is a PhD candidate in civil engineering with a focus on Water
Resources at Penn State University. Previous works with nongovernmental organi-
zations on clean drinking water projects in East Africa have provided inspiration for
her current doctoral research centered on household water insecurity in global
communities.
Carmen Bain is an associate dean for Academic Innovation in the College of
Agriculture and Life Sciences and professor of sociology at Iowa State University.
Her research has focused on governance within the agrifood system, including for
agricultural biote chnologies, and women’s empowerment within food and
agriculture.Ransom et al. 211
8 Standing with and speaking
as faith

A feminist-indigenous approach to inquiry

Kim TallBear

linquire in concert with diverse thinkers and communities implicated in knowledge
constituted at the intersections of technoscience and indigenous governance. I am
part anthropologist of science and technology (technoscience), but with an ethical
and methodological inheritance from a previous career as a tribal environmental
planner. The intersectional knowledges that I help articulate involve communities
of scientists—some of whom are indigenous, science educators, science policy
experts, and Native American and other indigenous community members. (I am
allergic to the term “informant.”) I converse with thinkers who resist, monitor,
regulate, collaborate in and sometimes reconfigure scientific research to serve
indigenous communities. I engage with technoscience in the service of indigenous
self-governance and livelihoods.

Reciprocity and jargon

Among social justice-minded researchers, there is an emphasis on reciprocity
with research subjects and communities. This is evident in the 2014 special issue
of The Journal of Research Practice subtitled “Giving Back in Field Research,”
in which an earlier version of this chapter first appeared. Feminist political
ecologists Clare Gupta and Alice Bridget Kelly edited the volume. They wrote in
the introduction:

[During fieldwork in sub-Saharan Africa] both researchers faced the difficult
question of “giving back” to the communities in which, and with whom, they
worked--communities that were often far less privileged than the researchers
were in terms of wealth, mobility, education, and access to health care.
Returning from their field sites, both researchers felt a combination of guilt
and frustration that they had not done enough or had not done things right.
(Gupta and Kelly 2014)

Likewise, indigenous researchers or “native anthropologists”’—working as
“insiders,” although we acknowledge that insiderness is always complicated
(Chipps 2004, Jacobs-Huey 2002, Innes 2009, Medicine 2001, Narayan 1993,
Ohnuki-Tierney 1984, Simpson 2007, Todorova-Pirgova 1999)—sometimes


Standing with and speaking as faith 79

struggle with our academic privilege. While we sometimes foreground reciprocity,
indigenous researchers are also likely to emphasize caring for our relations with
home communities when we do research there. Sometimes those relationships can
feel undermined by the protocols and foundational assumptions of academic
research: informed consent forms, interview techniques, recording technologies,
implicit hierarchies and presumed distance between researcher and researched,
knower and known.

To lessen that divide, we desire to make complex ideas accessible. It is not
uncommon to see discomfort with theoretical language, “jargon” as it is
disparagingly called, which is portrayed as disingenuous. Shawn Wilson in
Research is Ceremony (2008) writes:

it may be necessary for me to use some pretty big and daunting words. I try
hard not to use these words in everyday conversations, because I think that
too many people use big language as a way of belittling others. However,
some of the ideas T want you to understand require these words, as they are
able to get across a lot of meaning.

(13)

I want to trouble—as I have elsewhere—this assertion that specialized academic
terminology (social theory usually, with “hard”.science terminology exempted) is
elitist and meant to obscure (TallBear 2013, 121-122). This charge is also
conditioned by a presumed separation and hierarchy between researcher and
researched. It seems less objectionable when non-academics or indigenous or
other marginalized researchers who feel historically objectified and disempowered
by the dominant gaze critique complex theoretical language. But paradoxically,
‘speakers of highly complex scientific languages, e.g., genome terminology, made
intelligible as with any language only.through years of study, sometimes share a
defensive and even anti-intellectual streak regarding complex social-theoretical
language. For example, I have witnessed scientific thinkers charge social theorists
with being “silly, self-indulgent, and caught up in a diminutive subculture” when
the person trained in genomics does not immediately understand say a philosopher
of science. I counter that we need precise languages to talk about precise ideas that
have derived from specific histories of work, from the development of theories
and methods. Specialists of all persuasions wield dense specialty languages, from
medical professionals to attorneys, electricians and hairdressers to information
technology (IT) professionals. My allergy to thinking about “informants” extends
to the concept of a “field” that is somehow out there, while the hallowed walls of
the academy are “in here.” This includes challenging the idea that specialty
languages are necessarily indicative of hierarchy. I am especially concerned that
indigenous studies scholars committed to indigenous self-determination and to
maintaining relations with communities become adept at switching between
academic specialty languages and the languages of home. We should acknowledge
that different ideas can be robustly analyzed within different languages. We must
find some level of comfort with imperfect translations,


80 K. TallBear

As an indigenous thinker concerned with staying in relation, the notion of
reciprocity or “giving back” is inadequate. 1 and other researchers do not, in
simpler terms, exchange data for aid or service to the communities we study. Most
indigenous researchers study topics that include indigenous people, cultures,
practices, and/or lands. In thinking about the ethics of accountability in research
(whose lives, lands and bodies are inquired into and what do they get out of it?),
the goal of “giving back” to research subjects seems to target a key symptom of a
major disease in knowledge production, but not the crippling disease itself. That
is the binary between researcher and researched—between knowing inquirer and
who or what are considered to be the resources or grounds for knowledge
production. This is a fundamental condition of our academic body politic that has
only recently been pathologized, and still not by everyone. If what we want is
democratic knowledge production that serves not only those who inquire and their
institutions, but also those who are inquired upon, we must soften that boundary
erected long ago between those who know versus those from whom the raw
materials of knowledge production are extracted. Part of doing this is broadening
the conceptual field—thinking more expansively about what counts as risk
(ontological harms?) and rightful benefit (institution building and community
development?) in the course of building knowledge. It is also helpful to think
about the research process as a relationship-building process—a professional
networking process with colleagues (not “subjects”), as an opportunity for
conversation and sharing of knowledge, not simply data gathering. Research must
then be conceived in less linear ways without necessarily knowable goals at the
outset, For the institutions that employ and fund us, we will articulate specific
goals as guideposts. A researcher who “stands with” a community of subjects is
willing to be altered, to revise her stakes in the knowledge to be produced.

“Giving back,” however, sounds akin to standing on two sides of a boundary
that parties view as pretty much set. We good-intentioned liberals in the broader
imperialistic academy negotiate treaties—with individual subjects and sometimes
with collectives—across that boundary. We do this in good faith and we figure out
ways to do service or help build capacity in the communities in which we work.
Over the past decade I have been trying to figure incrementally how to articulate
research questions, conceive of subject populations, and approach knowledge
production from shared conceptual ground. 1 want to circumvent dualistic
relationships—even if they are not easily read as hierarchical—that more typically
characterize academic research and which the concept of reciprocity implies. 1
offer some insights that have helped me articulate shared conceptual ground and
shared stakes with those with whom I build knowledge.

I often study non-indigenous people (i.e., bioscientists), but I do this in the
service of indigenous self-determination. 1 advocate that indigenous peoples
engage explicitly with technoscience in order to make sure it serves their/our
interests rather than undermining us. The ethic of maintaining relations is one |
feel compelled to carry into my work with non-indigenous communities too—
those bioscientists, genetic genealogists and other scientific thinkers whose work
has important implications for indigenous lives. First with indigenous communities


Standing with and speaking as faith 81

and thinkers and later with scientific communities and thinkers I seek out and try
to articulate overlapping respective intellectual, ethical and institution-building
projects. I articulate shared goals and desires while staying engaged in critical
conversation and knowledge production.

Indigenous and feminist standpoint and care for the subject

My preoccupation with democratizing academic knowledge production began 40
years ago when J encountered Vine Deloria, Jr.’s (1969) ideas about the role of
anthropology in the colonial project, but simultaneously the promise of
intellectualism in helping us to resist colonialism. My mother, LeeAnn TallBear,
exposed me to Deloria’s thinking before I could read, when she was an
undergraduate student at Northern State College in Aberdeen, South Dakota in the
politically turbulent early 1970s. She demonstrated every day for her four children
that change and hope for our people involves constituting our own narratives from
our own lives and histories. She always had alternative history books in the house
and shared with us oral historical narratives of our Dakota people to counteract the
dominant colonial histories we received in public schools.

About a dozen years ago, I encountered feminist theorists Donna Haraway and
Sandra Harding who challenge standard notions Of objectivity that conflate it with
neutrality. Rather, they advocate situated knowledges (Haraway 1991) from the
“standpoint” of women, traditional cultures and other marginalized subjects. This
means that hypotheses, research questions, methods and valued outputs—
including historical accounts, sociological analyses and textual
interpretations—must begin from the lives, experiences and interpretations of
marginalized subjects (Harding 1991, 2008). If we promiscuously account for
standpoints, objectivity will be strengthened. Their language made quick sense to
me precisely because Deloria and TallBear had paved the intellectual path,

Lam also indebted to feminists who analyze and critique in a manner that “cares
for the subject” (Schuurman and Pratt 2002). They write of the intellectual and
ethical benefits of being invested in the knowledges and technologies one critiques,
and the shortcomings of critique for critique’s sake. Haraway provided me with a
conceptual and pragmatic framework that helps guide me in how to engage
critically in high-stakes problems as both an intellectual and an invested moral
agent. She does not simply study, but lives in dog worlds. She engages in everyday
technical conversations. She and her companion dogs do agility sports together.
She cares for, challenges, critiques and is generous with her human and nonhuman
companions. She inhabits that material and virtual world. “Fieldwork” would be a
misnomer. Likewise, | do not simply study indigenous communities. 1 inhabit
them, both locally and globally, within and without the academy. I am family,
friend and/or colleague to a stunningly diverse set of indigenous actors. I
participate daily in theit—our—conversations related to indigenous governance,
science, technology, economies and cultures. 1 work for indigenous flourishing. I
also critique toward that end. I have been figuring out how to do this work since I
was five years old, and also in a previous career as a planner. Haraway and Harding


82 K. TallBear

gave additional intellectual language beyond what Vine Deloria, Jr. and my
mother gave me to describe my approach and ethos.

Standing with and speaking as faith

The writing of another feminist intellectual has recently offered me additional
conceptual language for enacting the ethical orientation I have come to refer to as
“standing with” in inquiry. Neferti Tadiar’s articulation of sampalataya, Tagalog
for “act of faith,” helps address the outsider/insider angst that results from
attending too much to a non-feminist politics of objectivity and too little to the
politics of research for change within communities (Tadiar 2002). Tadiar explains
sampatlataya as referring in part to being “already caught up in the claims that
others act out,” which is different from speaking on behalf of (Tadiar 2002, 736).
Rather, one speaks as an individual “in concert with,” not silenced by one’s
inability to fully represent one’s people. I read this to be a sort of co-constitution
of one’s own claims and the claims and acts of the people(s) who one speaks in
concert with. Sampalataya involves speaking as faith—as furthering a people’s
claims while refusing to be excised from that people by an imperialistic, naive
notion of perfect representation.

Sampalataya guides me in inquiry from out of my commitments to, and
experiences among, my fellow Native Americans and other indigenous people. It
helps me articulate experiences among certain bioscientists whose projects I
decide to care for. I transfer an ethic of standing with other indigenous people—to
inquire in concert with their intellectual projects in the service of indigenous
sovereignty—to now to inquire in concert with (indigenous) bioscientists in the
service of shared causes. That is, 1 work with them in ways that support their
success in scientific endeavors, and simultaneously the development of their
critical lenses that may help demooratize science from within. Initially, I viewed
this as “studying across,” a term I adapt from Berkeley anthropologist Laura
Nader’s groundbreaking call for anthropologists to “study up.”

Several years after Vine Deloria, Jr. lambasted anthropology for its colonialism,
Nader admonished anthropologists to study “the colonizers rather than the
colonized, the culture of power rather than the culture of the powerless, the culture
of affluence rather than the culture of poverty” (Nader 1972, 284 and 289). I took
this to heart in my study of biological and other physical scientists and their
extractive practices of Native American bones, blood, saliva and hair. Instead of
studying indigenous “perspectives” on genetics, which federal agencies love to
fund, I decided to return the gaze—to study scientists. The bulk of my research
has been to study the histories and politics of genetic research practices as they
impact indigenous bodies, representations and governance.

However, methodologically and ethically, 1 found that studying up was not
easier than the traditional act of “studying down.” My book, Native American
DNA; Tribal Belonging and the False Promise of Genetic Science (TallBear
2013), is critical of the colonial practices that have made the concept of Native
American DNA possible. While the science is fascinating, I had little positive


Standing with and speaking as faith 83

investment in the particular intellectual projects of the non-indigenous human
genome diversity researchers whose work I studied. ] could not adequately “care”
for them as my subjects, which felt like bad feminist practice (Schuurman and
Pratt 2002). | was in a bind. In addition to enacting an oppositional politics of
returning the gaze, T had chosen to study scientists in order to avoid the social
challenges of doing anthropology at home. In studying up, I found another sort of
discomfort. I could not disown that feminist ethical imperative to study a
community in whose projects I can be invested. I had to find a way to study
bioscientists (whose work has profound implications for indigenous peoples) in a
way in which I could stand more within their community.

Taking ethics as the starting point, 1 began to interview and do participant
observation with other Native American PhDs-—-that is, biological scientists, I am
interested in their potential roles in the democratization of science and in the
development of indigenous science policy. Emphasizing participant observation,
I find myself moving, in Tadiar’s language, toward faithful knowledges—toward
co-constituting knowledge in concert with the acts and claims of those who I
inquire among. I have become invested in the careers of the young indigenous
with whom I work—in their development as good scientists in a world historically
dominated by White men. Indeed, because I care for them, T have come to engage
more productively in their fields. 1 serve as an ethics advisor for the annual
Summer Internship for Native Americans in Genomics (SING) for Native
American students and community members who want to learn genetics. I help
teach them about the politicized history of the field and explain the links between
collaborative research and indigenous regulation and sovereignty. Young
scientists teach me how someone coming from indigenous communities and
landscapes becomes passionate about bio-science. They help facilitate my growing
curiosity and knowledge about the science. It is an act of faith in the groundbreaking
work that they will do as indigenous scientists that 1 continue to network with and
professionally mentor SING graduates as they become professional scientists,
social scientists, or go back to positions in their communities where they will help
review and regulate scientific research in their communities. We quickly become
colleagues.

Accordingly, I also write and speak in venues that are not obviously fitting for
a social scientist’s career advancement. I frequent bio-scientific venues and I try
to write and speak accessibly. I do this to encourage their more democratic vision
of what the bio-sciences can be. The more I network, the more I am a useful
resource for indigenous scientists. [ work in small ways to enact the change that I
and other critics envision for the sciences. | attended and blogged a critical but
supportive review of an annual meeting of the Society for the Advancement of
Native Americans and Chicanos in Science (SACNAS).! SACNAS’s biannual
news magazine editor quickly asked me to serve on the editorial board as an
advisor on Native American issues. I blog to prompt conversation. In this case, I
cultivated an opportunity to help shape scientific ethics and policy content in the
organization’s regular publication. I served on the editorial board because | was
asked to serve. It is a sign of recognition that I was a valuable resource in the


84K. TallBear

community. It is also a case of the organization deciding how J should “give
back.” The board also enabled me to help collaboratively build discourse about
what constitutes more democratic scientific research and education. J expect that
change will come more profoundly from inside bio-scientific fields rather than
from critical social science and humanities analyses alone. I could not do this
work if] held fast to the misguided ship of distanced objectivity with my research
subjects. 1 work with bioscientists in ways that demonstrate feminist and
indigenous concepts of objectivity in action. In the meantime, my blogs—posted
to my website, Indigeneity and Technoscience—often serve as rough drafts of
academic pieces. They highlight my expertise in a unique multidisciplinary world
that | help create by naming it.

Some may find my insights and methods insufficiently replicable, although I
see them as pragmatic. Not all researchers will be situated as | am—a second-
career academic with training as a community planner, and an indigenous
(“insider”?) scholar who circulates regionally, nationally and internationally. J
find it doable to combine theory with practice for institutional change. Perhaps a
take-home point that will appeal to a wider array of readers is that feminist
objectivity—that is, inquiring not at a distance, but based on the lives and
knowledge priorities of subjects, reinforced by an indigenous ethic of staying in
relation—helps open up one’s mind to working in non-standard ways. It may take
you to new and surprising places.

Note

1 “SACNAS: Beyond ‘diversity and inclusion,’ making science more multicultural and
democratic,” Indigeneity & :Technoscience Blog, November 10, 2011, www.
kimtallbear.com/homeblog/sacnas-beyond-diversity-and-inclusion-making-science-
more-multicultural-and-democratic,

References

Chipps, Pakki, 2004, “Family first”. Native Studies Review, 15: 103-105,

Deloria, Jv, Vine. 1969, Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press.

Gupta, Clare and Alice B. Kelly. 2014. “The social relations of fieldwork: Giving back in
a research setting”. Journal of Research Practice, 10, Retrieved from http://jrp.icaap.
org/index.php/jrp/article/view/423/352.

Haraway, Donna. 1991. Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: TI he Reinvention of Nature. New
York: Routledge.

Harding, Sandra. 1991, Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Thinking from Women’s
Lives, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Harding, Sandra. 2008. Sciences from Below: Feminisms, Postcolonialities, and
Modernities. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Innes, Robert Alexander. 2009. “Wait a second. Who are you anyways?’: The insider/
outsider debate and American Indian studies”. The American Indian Quarterly, 33:
440-461.


Standing with and speaking as faith 85

Jacobs-Huey, Lanita. 2002, “Exchange across difference: The production of ethnographic
knowledge. The natives are gazing and talking back: Reviewing the problematics of
positionality, voice, and accountability among ‘native’ anthropologists”. American
Anthropologist, 104: 791-804.

Medicine, Beatrice. 2001. Learning to Be an Anthropologist and Remaining “Native”.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Nader, Laura. 1972. “Up the anthropologist: Perspectives gained from studying up”. In
Dell Hymes, ed. Reinventing Anthropology. New York: Vintage, pp. 284-311,

Narayan, Kirin. 1993, “How native is a ‘native’ anthropologist”. American Anthropologist,
95: 671-686,

Ohnuki-Tierney, Emiko. 1984. “‘Native’ anthropologists”. American Ethnologist, \1:
584-586.

Schuurman, Nadine and Geraldine Pratt. 2002, “Care of the subject: Feminism and critiques
of GIS”, Gender, Place and Culture, 9: 291-299,

Simpson, Audra. 2007. “On ethnographic refusal: Indigeneity, ‘voice’ and colonial
citizenship”. Junctures: 67-80.

Tadiar, Neferti X,M. 2002. “Himala (miracle): The heretical potential of Nora Aunor’s star
power”, Signs: Journal af Women in Culture and Society, 27: 61-16.

TallBear, Kim. 2013, Native American DNA: Tribal Belonging and the False Promise of
Genetic Science. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

TallBear, Kim. 2014, “Standing with and speaking as faith: A feminist-indigenous approach
to inquiry [research note]”. Journal of Research Practice, 10, Retrieved from http://jrp.
icaap.org/index.php/jrp/article/view/405/371.

Todorova-Pirgova, Iveta. 1999. “‘Native’ anthropologist: On the bridge or at the border”.
Anthropological Journal on European Cultures, 8: 171-190.

Wilson, Shawn. 2008. Research is Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods. Winnipeg:
Fernwood Publishing.




Toxic Uncertainties and Epistemic Emergence:
Understanding Pesticides and Health in Lao PDR
Annie Shattuck
Department of Geography, Indiana University
Agrichemicals and other toxicants are now ubiquitous in both human bodies and the environment, yet
public debate and scientific practice on their effects are still mired in uncertainty. Recent research in the
history of science, feminist science, and technology studies has advanced ways of thinking about ignorance
and uncertainty. Combined with key insights from political ecology, specifically the ontological continuity ofbodies and environments and the uneven production of both knowledge and exposure, I suggest a
conceptual intervention. I propose epistemic emergence —a way of thinking about the relations between
forms of often situated, partial, and imperfect evidence that could be greater than the sum of their parts —as
a way of working with uncertainty. Epistemic emergence pairs conventional scientific data with lay methods,
takes into account the complex ecology in which exposures occur, considers how exposure interacts with
social lives, and asks what forms of knowledge might make harm articulate enough for action (Liboiron2015 ) in a particular context. Using a case study of community-based biomonitoring in upland Laos where
pesticide use was near zero fifteen years ago and today risky levels of biomarkers for insecticide appear in
children, I discuss what epistemic emergence might look like in practice. Key Words: pesticides, political
ecology of health, science and technology studies, uncertainty.
The presumption that bodies could be isolated
from environments —that they are ontologi-
cally separable things —was a founding
assumption of environmental health science (Nash
2008 ). Given the ubiquity of agrichemicals and
other toxicants, this separation needs to be reex-
amined. Geographers have recently begun to break
down the ontological and conceptual barrier
between bodies and environments (Guthman and
Mansfield 2013 ), challenging the link between
behavior and exposure (Mansfield 2012 ; Galt 2013 )
and demonstrating the uneven distribution of the
ability to mitigate environmental toxic risks (Barraza
et al. 2011 ; Galt 2013 ). At nearly every scale and in
every part of the world, chemicals and bodies are
materially entangled (Agard-Jones 2013 ) in ways
that are very difficult to standardize, detect, manage,and predict. The current scientific debates on pesti-
cide—most notably in lawsuits over Roundup —echo
almost exactly the terms of debate set over lead arse-
nate in the 1940s (see Whorton 1975 ). Getting
past those stale debates requires evaluating the epis-
temological biases and the ontological premise on
which we evaluate harm and finding new ways ofworking with the radical uncertainties that such a
premise might present.Recent work in the history of science, feminist
science, and technology studies has much to say on
this particular impasse. The toxic effects of agri-
chemicals are largely imperceptible (Murphy 2006 ),
especially in the places where the majority of the
worlds ’pesticide users live and work. Understanding
bodies and environments as ontologically continu-
ous, I argue, requires that we think about agrichemi-
cals as agnogenic (Proctor and Schiebinger 2008 ).
Between the confounding variables that muddlecause and effect, because of the potential for the
impacts of agrichemicals to interact with other
health factors, and because of the way in which they
interact with social lives in unpredictable ways, agri-
chemicals interact with people and environments in
such a way as to create ignorance (Stone 2014 ).
Combined with key insights from political ecology,specifically the ontological continuity of bodies and
environments and the uneven production of both
knowledge and exposure, I suggest a conceptual
intervention for political ecologies of health and
exposure where uncertainty is high and resources are
scarce. I propose epistemic emergence as way of think-
ing about the relations between forms of often situ-ated, partial, and imperfect evidence that could be
greater than the sum of their parts. Paired with more
Annals of the American Association of Geographers , 111(1) 2021, pp. 216 –230#2020 by American Association of Geographers
Initial submission, October 2019; revised submission, February 2020; final acceptance, April 2020
Published by Taylor & Francis, LLC.
conventional methods, epistemic emergence offers us
a way of working with uncertainty or, to paraphrase
Liboiron ( 2015 ), make complex forms of harm articu-
late enough for action.
I begin with a discussion of the uneven geography
of environmental health science and the ways in
which agrichemicals produce ignorance. I then pre-
sent an ethnography of a community-based biomoni-
toring project in northern Laos in which local
activists and government officials faced trying tomake the impact of insecticide exposures visible.
Then I return to the idea of epistemic emergence
from multiple, partial knowledges.
Thinking Beyond
Body –Environment Dualisms
Geographers are increasingly looking at health as
a complex nature –society issue (Mansfield 2012 ;
Sultana 2012 ). Political ecologies of health offer key
insights about how health is situated within political,
economic, and environmental systems that are
deeply unequal, as well on the material consequences
of the various ways in which health is discursivelyand scientifically understood (King 2010 ). Emerging
work in environment –health geographies goes fur-
ther to fundamentally rethink the assumed boundary
between bodies and environments, with the body ’s
permeability as a key theme (Senanayake and
King 2019 ). Efforts to open the “black box ”of the
body treat bodies as mutable, biological, and consti-tuted through interactions with the environment
(Guthman and Mansfield 2013 , 486). This more
ecological approach highlights how porous bodies are
to the chemicals, hormones, microbes, stressors, and
resources of the environment and, in return, how
the body responds to the environment in iterative
ways (Guthman and Mansfield 2013 ; Jackson and
Neely 2015 ). This approach sees bodies as inherently
situated and unevenly produced (Guthman andMansfield 2013 ). Such a conceptual model is partic-
ularly applicable to pesticides and toxics, because
experiences of toxicity can differ based on history of
prior exposure, other health conditions like poor
nutrition and kidney disease, and environmental
conditions like soil type and groundwater resources
(Nash 2004 ). Work on toxics in other contexts
shows how exposure itself is the result of a complex
ecology. Symptoms might manifest in different ways
in different bodies at different times; such variabilityhighlights the need to look at emergent properties
in complex body –environment ecologies (Murphy
2006 ). New work on epigenetic effects of certain
agrichemicals makes it extremely difficult to prove a
relationship between a particular site of exposure
and the onset of illness; such illness might not mani-fest for a generation and could be altered by
other events over a life course (Romero et al. 2017 ).
New work in chemical geographies recognizes that
such a reality defies the fundamental assumptions of
spatial epidemiology (Romero et al. 2017 ) and thus
requires new methodical approaches. One way in
which political ecologies of health have dealt with
such issues is to rely on partial and situated accounts(Jackson and Neely 2015 )—methods that do not
count in standard regulatory science. Much like
approaches pioneered in popular epidemiology and
civic science, such an approach can expand the ter-
rain of what kinds of knowledge count and providean organizing framework for more expert knowledge
(Brown 1992 ; Kroll-Smith and Floyd 2000 ; Ottinger
and Cohen 2011 ; Wylie, Shapiro, and Liboiron
2017 ). When bodies and environments are seen as
mutually constituted, however, an array of knowl-
edge beyond questions of chemical hazard becomes
relevant to the question of impact, from how (agro)-
chemicals act on social lives, race, gender, resources,and opportunity (Agard-Jones 2013
; Luna 2018 ).
Such an understanding introduces a significant
additional degree of uncertainty into environment –
health geography (Senanayake and King 2019 ). I
suggest that one way of working with these uncer-
tainties is to be clear about the epistemic and onto-logical limits of current approaches, relying on
multiple situated knowledges, and taking seriously
the impetus toward pursuing explanation at the scale
of emergent properties (Murphy 2006 ; Senanayake
and King 2019 ). Such an approach can help avoid
the“data treadmill ”(Shapiro, Zakariya, and Roberts
2017 , 583) and orient toward questions of what kind
of knowledge, and for who might spur action.Drawing on recent work in the history of science
and science and technology studies, I illustrate the
epistemic limits of current approaches to document-ing pesticide impacts in the Global South. I also sug-
gest that thinking past body –environment dualisms
requires understanding the way in which agrichemi-
cals and other toxicants produce ignorance. Such a
project can offer a different theoretical and practicaltoolkit to articulate what counts as harm.Toxic Uncertainties and Epistemic Emergence 217
The Uneven Production of Knowledge
and Exposure
In 2018, 28 percent of global employment was in
agriculture (World Bank 2019 ). Whereas in the
United States, the European Union, and other eco-nomically advantaged regions, the proportion of peo-
ple employed in agriculture has been falling for over
a century, in South Asia, East Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa, the number of people working inagriculture has actually grown since the 1960s
(World Bank 2008 ). These places are also some of
the fastest growing pesticide markets. Pesticide use isincreasing worldwide almost twice as fast as food
production, but it is expanding the fastest in middle-
income countries (Schreinemachers and Tipraqsa2012 ). Although data are thin in low-income coun-
tries where agricultural commercialization is expand-
ing, there is ample case study evidence that pesticide
use is rapidly increasing among low-income small-holders —for example, in Kenya, Bolivia, Ethiopia,
Mali, China, and India (Haggblade et al. 2017 ;
Bickel 2018 ; Ottiger 2018 ). Simply put, more people
than ever are exposed to agrichemicals, largely inenvironments with minimal monitoring, regulation,
and health surveillance.
Drawing on feminist science studies, we can think
of the uncertainties surrounding such everyday expo-sures as what Murphy ( 2006 ) called a domain of
imperceptibility. By this she meant the absence of
scientific knowledge created by the epistemologicallimits of a disciplinary approach and the often pur-
posely created imperceptibility designed to make the
impacts of —and responsibility for —chemical harms
uncertain (Murphy 2006 ). This imperceptibility is
profoundly geographically uneven. Aside from the
efforts of industry to sow doubt and the deprioritized
nature of much environmental health research, thereare serious epistemic limits to the current approach inlow-resource environments. For example, poisoning
cases are the most straightforward effects of agrichem-
icals to recognize and document, yet the phenomenonis woefully undercounted. To illustrate, a project to
improve the needlessly bureaucratic system of health
surveillance in the Western Cape of South Africaincreased reported pesticide poisoning rates tenfold;86 percent of cases were occupational exposure
(London and Bailie 2001 ). Another survey of 32,245
agricultural workers in Central America indicatedthat pesticide poisoning was previously underreportedin the region ’s health surveillance systems by 98 per-
cent, amounting to 400,000 poisonings a year
(Murray et al. 2002 ). Contrast this figure with the
official United Nations (UN) global estimate of
200,000 annual poisoning cases (UN Special
Rapporteur on the Right to Food 2017 ).
Even the good data are epistemologically limited;
they count only the immediate, acute reactions that
require medical attention to the point where there
would be a report or interaction with a clinic, which
in low-resource rural areas is not guaranteed to be
available. In much of the Global South, pesticide
use is largely informal (see, e.g., Barraza et al. 2011 ;
Galt 2014 ; Shattuck 2019 ). Protective equipment
can be impractical for hot, humid, or steep land-
scapes; too expensive; not provided by plantation
owners; and not properly maintained. Its use can be
constrained by social norms or the ecological condi-
tions of farming far from wells, tanks, and hygiene
facilities (Murray et al. 2002 ; UN Special Rapporteur
on the Right to Food 2017 ). The gap between farm-
ers’knowledge of pesticide hazards and strict adher-
ence to best pesticide handling practices is “an
extremely robust finding about real-world situations
from behavioral and social scientists ”
(Galt 2013 ,
345), meaning that low-level acute poisoning, unre-
ported accidents, and low-level chronic exposures are
almost certainly a fact of life in the majority of places
where pesticides are used, to largely uncertain effect.
Then there is the question of which bodies “count ”’
(Guthman and Brown 2016 ). It is worth noting the
obvious: Agricultural workers and small-scale farmers
are socially marginalized globally. Phenomena that
predominantly affect marginalized communities, likepesticide drift, are little studied (Harrison 2006 ).
Efforts to make impacts of pesticide visible share a his-
tory with farm worker organizing (Nash 2004 ).
Migrant agricultural workers the world over are dis-
proportionately exposed and yet are rarely included in
epidemiological or biomonitoring studies; cancers and
other health issues can take ten to twenty years to
show up, and tracking down migrant workers to moni-
tor health impacts has “rarely been possible ”in epide-
miology (Alavanja 2009 , 305), especially because
migrant workers often have precarious citizenship andjob status. For biomonitoring, scientists need lab
equipment, knowledgeable people to run it, supplies
to run tests, and universities, governments, and com-
panies that can support them to do so. To paraphrase
Latour ( 1987 ), hard facts are expensive.218 Shattuck
Long-term prospective cohort studies tracking pes-
ticide users, the gold standard in epidemiology, are
costly and, if long term, require political, institu-
tional, and population stability over as much as adecade or more to complete. Relatively fewer longi-
tudinal studies of children, like those in the Unites
States that exposed the impacts of organophosphates
on brain development (Gunier et al. 2017 ), have
taken place in the Global South. The studies that
do exist, however, indicate that exposures and
health outcomes for agricultural workers might bemore serious than they are in better surveilled coun-
tries like the United States. A pilot study of fifty
female agricultural workers in Thailand, for example,
found that average concentrations of urinary metab-
olites of organophosphate insecticides were twice thecomparable figure from a study of farm workers in
California ’s Salinas Valley and almost three times
higher than in the general U.S. population (Ryan
et al. 2012 ). Higher rates of exposure were associated
with lower birth weight and adverse birth outcomes
(Naksen et al. 2015 ). The expanded SAWASDEE
study, funded largely by the U.S. National Institutesof Health (NIH), follows 300 mothers and their
children for three years after birth at a cost of
$563,957 (NIH 2018 ). A similar cohort study of 350
mothers is ongoing in South Africa (Naidoo et al.
2016 ), as is another looking at reproductive and
neurobehavioral health effects due to pesticide expo-
sure among 1,000 adolescents in the Western Cape
(Chetty-Mhlanga et al. 2018 ). In short, studies of
the relationship between pesticides and bodily health
exist all over the world (Wesseling et al. 1997 ;U N
Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food 2017 ). The
problem is that the knowledge that exists concernspopulations least likely to count politically, is often
partial, and is often insufficient to overcome uncer-
tainty in the traditional regulatory frame. This
imperceptibility has a politics: In waiting for cer-
tainty, one abdicates liability and responsibility for
any resulting human health and ecological harm.
Ignorance and Agnogenesis
The debate on agrichemical safety is at a discur-
sive, political, and empirical impasse.1Although
there is certainly strong evidence that chemical
companies have worked to hide or “manufacture
doubt ”about the true toxicological impact of their
products (Markowitz and Rosner 2002 ; Oreskes andConway 2010 ; Lerner 2017 ), such purposeful malfea-
sance is not necessary to produce uncertainty about
the toxic entanglements of bodies and agrichemicals.
Uncertainty about what constitutes harm and ade-
quate evidence for it is not difficult to come by —it
is a product of the science itself, a product of how
agrichemicals alter both bodies and environments.
In August 2018, a former groundskeeper slowly
dying at the age of forty-six from non-Hodgkins lym-
phoma was awarded a $289 million judgment against
the makers of glyphosate. The plaintiffs presented
key evidence based on laboratory studies of mice.
The attorneys for the company called up evidence
from a long-term cohort study of 90,000 farm work-ers that found no evidence of increased cancer risk.
2
The company ’s attorneys raised doubts that damage
found in mice and rats was a good stand-in for
humans. Amy Cornell, president of the Agribusiness
Council of Indiana, stood by glyphosate in the press,
saying it “is one of the world ’s most studied chem-
icals”(in Bienkowski 2018 ). Cornell ’s claim might
very well be true but does not exonerate glyphosate
by itself. In fact, the debate over the Roundup trials
(which at the time of writing include more than
13,400 filings in U.S. courts) is an echo of the past.The first debate over commercial pesticides in the
United States was over lead arsenate. There, too, a
cohort study found no impact on orchardists using
the product —even in a follow-up thirty years later
(Nelson et al. 1973 ; Whorton 1975 ). U.S. Food and
Drug Administration officials at the time argued that
the only way to see damage was in animal trials; the
industry argued that rats and guinea pigs were not a
perfect analogue for people (Whorton 1975 ). Of
course, lead arsenate is now unquestionably associ-
ated with skin and lung cancers and adverse neuro-
logical effects (National Library of Medicine n. d.).
The time lag between exposure and effect is so wellestablished for toxics writ large that some impacts
can only be seen through “slow observation ”(Davies
2018 , 1537).
The disciplinary roots of regulatory environmental
health science lie in both industrial hygiene and
public health sanitation (Nash 2008 ). The idea that
both bodies and environments absorbed industrialchemicals was not, in itself, a problem; how much
they absorbed was (Nash 2008 ). Quantifying this
absorption in a bounded space (like the factory) to
predict a threshold beyond which an effect could be
traced to a single, measurable cause —for example,Toxic Uncertainties and Epistemic Emergence 219
lung disease and dust —became the standard (Nash
2008 ). The other pillar of historical toxicology was
based in public health sanitation approaches deeply
influenced by germ theory. These early reformers
emphasized bodily purity and believed that disease
could be localized in particular pathogens from
which the body could be isolated. This, according toNash ( 2008 , 655), “cultivated an unrealistic public
expectation that environments are —or at least
should be —external to health. ”Chemicals came to
be assessed on a molecule-by-molecule basis, not
because that is necessarily how they work in the
world but because of the “molecular bureaucracy ”
with which we came to understand them (Hepler-
Smith 2019 ). The field of risk assessment developed
to center on thresholds of exposure to individual
molecules with traceable, predictable causes and
effects —on the technical risk assessment of certain
objects —not the multigenerational impacts, environ-
ments, and social relations they alter. The legacy is
such that regulatory science has robust, necessary,
and ultimately narrow standards against which evi-
dence is evaluated.
Agrichemicals are agnogenic (Proctor and
Schiebinger 2008 ; Stone 2014 ) by nature: Materially
the way they work in the world produces uncer-
tainty. The latency between suspicion and scientific
consensus about a chemical ’s effect is just one form
of this agnogenic nature. Agrichemicals and their
products come into contact with people and ecolo-
gies and socialities in so many ways that each inter-
action, each product, creates a whole field of things
about which we know nothing. To paraphrase
anthropologist Stone ( 2014 ), this is not necessarily
dangerous: The danger of any technology lies in the
context in which it is used.
Latour ( 2009 ) argued that social scientists must
move “from certainty about the production of risk-
free objects (with their clear separation between
things and people) to uncertainty about the relations
whose unintended consequences threaten to disrupt
all orderings, all plans, all impacts ”(25). Taking this
seriously asks researchers to focus on the relations
those objects disrupt (for better or worse). This goes
beyond the common focus on how agrichemicals areused and whether they are used according to safety
instructions. Agrichemicals themselves are a sort of
a social agent. They allow plantations to thrive
where it was previously impossible to grow industrial
crops and thus consolidate the ownership of land(Murray 1994 ). They can allow small farmers to get
a grip on the cash economy (Castellanos-Navarrete
and Jansen 2018 ). They might save labor and make
education more possible for children, especially girls
(Admassie and Bedi 2003 ; Edmond 2017 ). They
can grow debt as well as cotton (Gray and Dowd-Uribe 2013 ). Men might have more access to
chemical inputs, increasing intrahousehold power
differences (Peterman, Behrman, and Quisumbing2014 ). Agrichemicals can improve the social status
o fl o w - c a s t ey o u n gm e n( A g a 2019 ). Agrichemicals
might change conceptions of sexuality and mascu-
linity to great consequence (Agard-Jones 2013 ).
They are imbricated in ideas of whiteness and
blackness, modernity and race (Luna 2018 ).
The imbrications of agrichemicals, economies,
and socialities alter the fundamental social determi-
nants of health. The way in which agrichemicals dis-
rupt social relations can thus have every bit as
powerful an impact on bodies as their long-term tox-
icological profiles. These social impacts are not
cleanly predictable; they can be transformative in
ways that belie easy normative judgments. Thislarger definition of chemicals ’agency is a more
empirically faithful way to pose the questions “How
do agrichemicals affect public health? ”or“What
happens when agrichemicals act on bodies and their
environments? ”
The agnogenic nature of agrichemicals and the
history of uncertainty around their effects point to
an epistemological and ontological impasse —a choke
point in both how we know and how we imagine
agrichemicals and bodily entanglements. Latour gave
an apt metaphor to imagine the epistemic limits of
science: “Scientific facts are like trains, they do not
work off their rails, ”he wrote. “You can extend the
rails and connect them but you cannot drive a loco-
motive through a field ”(Latour 1992 , as cited in
Carolan 2008 ). This metaphor can be expanded to
think about whole disciplines; those, too, work on
epistemic “rails”(Carolan 2008 ). Although the fields
of toxicology and epidemiology traverse important
ground, they do not capture the whole field of rela-
tions that determine the health effects of agrichemi-
cals. As long as the debate remains on those rails,
essential though they might be, the evidence will
likely continue to be debated on the same necessary
but insufficient terms.
Framing the debate on agrichemical safety on the
narrow disciplinary tracks on which they currently220 Shattuck
travel writes out all of the relations that are situated
or can be only partially grasped (Haraway 1988 ).
Data gathered by less expensive methods or by non-
researchers, data that are nonstandardized, particular
to a place, qualitative, partial, or situated, are often
seen as not objective enough for inclusion in regula-
tory processes. Such types of data are often purpose-fully kept out by regulators and regulatory scientists
(along with industry) from environmental decision
making because they rely on “things that cannot be
counted but for which most people matter just as
much as the things that can be unproblematically
added and subtracted ”(Carolan 2008 , 735-726).
What is valid or visible to the state —and thus
actionable —is an essential, but partial, take on the
whole field of available evidence. It is not that the
impacts of rapidly increasing pesticide use are impos-
sible to assess; it is that these impacts are unlikely to
be evaluated in ways that meet the high scientific
standard required of a modern managerial or juridical
approach to risk assessment, and even if they did,
they are unlikely on their own to force political
action because of whose bodies they affect.
As scholars of health social movements have long
pointed out, the kinds of science taken on by citizen
science projects, nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), and other laypeople can make impacts visi-
ble and bodies count in ways that often precede for-
mal, more scientifically acceptable university or
government efforts (Brown 2007 ; Iles 2007 ; Hess
2009 ). NGOs in the United States and Europe
already produce scientific and technical inputs in
combination with evidence of everyday exposures
and, in some cases, helped political actors to inter-pret the science differently from most regulatory sci-
entists (Iles 2007 ). Public epidemiology and civic
science have long combined lay and expert methods
of toxicological assessment, often using lay methods
to organize and justify attention and resources from
experts with methods more legible to the state
(Brown 1992 ; Fortun and Fortun 2005 ; Wylie,
Shapiro, and Liboiron 2017 ). The resources to move
up from or connect lay and expert methods as in the
model of popular epidemiology are more likely to
represent the global regulatory exception rather thanthe rule, however. Depending on the context, the
audience for such data might or might not be state
regulators. Who will be the most effective actor,
what might be a successful organizing strategy, who
needs to be informed, and how cannot be assumed.Even where formal studies are connected to civic
science, political struggles often get stuck in a tug of
war over what data are acceptable, creating a “data
treadmill ”that can stymie action (Shapiro, Zakariya,
and Roberts 2017 ).
The issue, to paraphrase Liboiron ’s work on
microplastic pollution, is decidedly not a lack of cor-
relative evidence for some sort of health effects
given the exposures that are occurring. The problem
is that the available evidence, the evidence that is
practically quantifiable, does not provide a clear, sci-
entifically decisive picture of what effects are pro-
duced under what conditions, in which bodies at
which time, and whether those effects can be calledharm (Liboiron 2015 ). The big question for an
increasingly contaminated planet is how to “make
emerging, amorphous forms of harm not only dis-
cernible, but
articulate enough for action ”(Liboiron
2015 , 4, italics added).
I now turn to a case where local organizations
attempted to do just that in the uplands of
Lao PDR.
Growing Pesticide Use and Uncertainty
in Lao PDR
Until fifteen years ago, Laos was one of the
world ’s lowest per capita agrichemical users.
Beginning in the early 2000s, a rapid transition to
commercial agriculture was accompanied by a rapid
increase in the use of agrichemicals. Data from the
Lao Ministry of Agriculture show that from 2006 to2016 , pesticide imports increased 3,696 percent
3as
commercial agriculture took off. In Xieng Khouang
Province, where the following case is situated, this
increase translated into a local change from zero pes-
ticide use to two to three times the standard indus-
try-recommended herbicide application rates on
average. Although widespread pesticide use there
began with the arrival of commodity maize, chemical
use is increasingly spreading to traditional upland
rice production, on vegetables for local markets, and
in the small-scale contract horticulture that followedthe maize boom (Asai 2016 ; Rassapong et al. 2018 ).
For these latter growers, exposure can be nontrivial.
One NGO survey estimated that Lao vegetable farm-
ers are using more pesticide per acre than other
growers in the region, and exposure for those vegeta-
ble farmers is between 93 and 128 days per year
(Rural Development Sole [RDS] 2016 ). In addition,Toxic Uncertainties and Epistemic Emergence 221
pesticide use is largely informal. Chemical mixing is
often done directly in stream beds in blue tarpsstrung over bamboo frames. Protective clothing is
practical for the heat but insufficient to protect peo-
ple; signs of low-level exposure are nearly universal
and stories of accidents and acute poisoning are
commonplace (Shattuck 2019 ).
Over thirteen months between 2016 and 2018, I
joined NGO and Lao government efforts to assessand reduce risk from pesticides. This work was part
of a larger project on social and environmental
transformations in the Lao uplands, which includedan eighty-seven-household survey of maize farmers;
thirty-one semistructured interviews with govern-
ment officials and NGO workers working on pesti-cide issues and agricultural development in the area;
and semistructured interviews with twenty-seven pes-
ticide applicators (Shattuck 2019 ). Using participant
observation, I followed government and NGO pesti-
cide risk reduction and extension activities and acommunity-based biomonitoring project conducted
by a Thai environmental NGO and the Lao
Ministry of Health. I also tracked the politics of thedata they collected as they were presented in gov-
ernment meetings and development industry forums.
The data in question began with a program of
RDS, a small Lao company partnered with a regional
NGO called The Field Alliance and HelvetasInternational, a Swiss government-affiliated develop-
ment organization. RDS used rapid blood cholines-
terase tests in middle schools to promote awareness
of pesticide safety. Over eighteen months, RDS in
partnership with the Department of Agriculture andthe Ministry of Health tested more than 2,200
schoolchildren, farmers, and consumers for acetyl-
cholinesterase inhibition —a sign of organophosphate
and carbamate exposure —using the inexpensive
field-based test kit developed by the Thai Ministry
of Health.
4
The group would show up at a school, with
Ministry of Health staff in white lab coats bearingvials and reactive test papers that would turn a par-
ticular color to be read. Students and farmers would
line up in long queues and answer a series of official
questions. Officials from the ministry would prick a
finger of each student, sample the blood, and returna result. The test papers gave results in qualitative
categories: unsafe, risky, safe, and normal.
5
The results were enough to startle government
officials. In the first round of testing, 49 percent ofschoolchildren in two villages in Xieng Khouang
and 58 percent in two villages on the outskirts of
Vientiane Capital were in the unsafe or risky catego-ries (RDS 2016 ). Between consumers, schoolchil-
dren, and farmers, consumers —largely government
officials —had the most unsafe and risky test results.
The following March, the group did another roundof testing in five villages that grew maize in Xieng
Khouang. By March, most of the dry season vegeta-
ble production has finished and land is beginning tobe prepared for maize and rice, which means that
the peak season for insecticide use had passed a
month or two earlier. Overall, 35 percent of partici-pants tested at risky or unsafe levels of cholinesterase
inhibition. Of the 422 primary and secondary school
students tested, 33 percent has levels that were riskyor unsafe. Of 494 farmers, 34 percent fell into thesetwo categories (RDS 2016 ). Again, consumers were
more affected than farmers; 47 percent of consumers
were in the risky and unsafe categories. Given thatconsumers seemed to have higher levels of cholines-
terase inhibition, practitioners assumed in the
absence of reliable data that consuming residues onvegetables could be as much to blame as occupa-
tional exposure.
I observed while these data were presented in a
half dozen Lao government meetings. In every one,
when the fact that government officials tested at
higher risk levels than farmers was mentioned, amurmur went around the room. In meetings ofmostly white, foreign international development
workers, this was the statistic that created a buzz. I
received questions over e-mail and in meetings aboutwhat this means for urban children —the children of
government officials and development workers; peo-
ple with bodies that count to those with power.
Partially in response to concerns over the RDS
data, especially regarding exposure of consumers, the
provincial government set up a system to screen veg-etables for pesticide residues using the widely avail-able Gt test kit. They indicated that residues were
potentially an important exposure pathway as they
are in neighboring Thailand (Patarasiriwong 2017 ),
but the test itself is a low-accuracy screening tool.
An official described to me additional issues in try-
ing to train staff to use the tests in the field:
The test strips change colors based on how much
pesticide is there. But sometimes it is very hard to tell.
Often we go to the market, or to farmers ’fields to do
the testing, and it depends on the light what the color222 Shattuck
looks like. My team is discussing what the color is, what
the result is, in front of the farmer, and is it difficult tobe certain. Sometimes we go to the farmer to say theirvegetables are contaminated and they say it is impossiblebecause they do not spray or they do not trust the test(Interview with government official, Xiang Khouang,Laos. Interviewed November 13, 2017).
Although my (mostly foreign) colleagues loved to
point to problems of corruption and “capacity ”in
Laos, in this case that was not the issue. The official
in charge graduated from a prominent Western uni-
versity and very seriously wanted to try to get
enough information to solve the problem. There
simply wasn ’t the cash or lab facilities.
There is very clearly a geographic or place-based
imperceptibility here —the resources to do “good sci-
ence”or even move up from or connect lay and
expert methods as in the model of popular epidemi-
ology are extremely limited in this context.
Furthermore, Laos does not have a national system
of health surveillance. The government is currently
developing such a system, but the planned system
does not have a category for reporting poisoning
cases or pesticide-related accidents.
There is another issue with using cholinesterase
activity as a biomarker in places like the Lao
uplands. Cholinesterase inhibition can also be an
indicator of or be exacerbated by anemia, malnutri-
tion, liver disease, and hepatitis (Ramachandran
et al. 2014 ). Low-protein diets are common in
remote areas, as is micronutrient deficiency. Laos
also has one of the highest rates of liver disease in
the world, thanks to the prevalence of a parasite in
padek , the locally popular raw fermented fish paste,
and the prevalence of hepatitis B (Black et al.
2014 ). How much measured cholinesterase inhibi-
tion is enhanced by these factors is unknown
(although liver disease is unlikely to affect children).
The blood tests the group was using were, like
many lay methods, imperfect and less accurate than
gas chromatography and other lab methods. They did
not have to be perfect, however. I was told numerous
times by the NGO workers involved in the project
that the data were for “awareness raising. ”They were
an“indicator ”that there is a problem, one worker told
me. The data are “for the farmers and their families,
not the international community, ”another explained.
The audience for these data was not primarily a gov-
ernment with too few resources to even stop banned
products from appearing on shelves and zero politicalwill to slow the growth of commercial agriculture. In
this case, the primary audience for the data was the
community itself.
We came to an impasse in the field, a sort of
microcosm of the larger agnogenic nature of agri-
chemicals, when discussing what to tell the parents
about what might happen to their children who had
tested in the risky or unsafe categories, other than
generally to avoid exposure. What might the long-
term effects be? There was no way to know for sure.
The group did not stop trying to get more and
better information. I participated in the group ’s
other efforts to assess the impacts of pesticides,
including an analysis of a limited number of urine
samples with gas chromatography to corroborate the
field tests and laboratory testing of soil and waterfrom two model watersheds, as well as interviewing
pesticide applicators and surveying maize farmers for
my own research. At the request of two villages in
which water contamination was a source of conflict
between upstream and downstream villages, the
group tested water and soil samples for pesticide con-
tamination. In one predominantly maize farming
community, atrazine was detected in surface waters
in and downstream from the village at rates up to
four times higher than World Health Organization
standards for drinking water (Rassapong et al. 2018 ).
I also surveyed maize farmers, 7 percent of whom
reported having vomited after spraying herbicides
(Shattuck 2019 ).
To try to corroborate the results of the rapid field
tests, the group also took urine samples from a very
small group of volunteers (twenty-one farmers, stu-dents, and government officials) to send to a univer-
sity lab in Chiang Mai to test for metabolites of
organophosphates and pyrethroids and glyphosate
excretion. The much more costly urine samples the
group had analyzed according to standard scientific
procedure also indicated exposure is common.
Testing urinary metabolites with liquid or gas chro-
matography in a lab costs $80 to $100 per sample in
the region. The group only tested the urine for
metabolites of organophosphates, not carbamates,
which are anecdotally more widely used on vegeta-bles locally. They also tested for a metabolite of
pyethroids and for glyphosate excretion. Pyrethroids
are commonly used on both vegetable crops and
indoors to combat mosquitoes and other insects.
Glyphosate is the second most commonly applied
herbicide in the maize growing communities,Toxic Uncertainties and Epistemic Emergence 223
although it is on track to replace paraquat for the
top spot. Glyphosate was detected in 24 percent of
the urine samples, from three farmers and two young
students in farming families.
These results were startling but not out of step for
the region. The combination of methods the group
used followed in microscale those used in a study of
841 farmers and consumers by the Thai Department
of Environmental Quality, which found that more
than 85 percent exceeded the index values for
cumulative dietary exposure and were potentially at
risk for impacts to the nervous and endocrine sys-
tems (Patarasiriwong 2017 ).
Of course, the sample sizes in Laos were limited
by resources, but there were other more intrinsic
sources of uncertainty where the uneven production
of science and the agnogenic nature of toxics inter-
act. The levels of urinary metabolites in a single
sample can be affected by a wide variety of varia-
bles—time since last exposure, diet and water con-
sumption, age, alcohol consumption —all of which
can affect body metabolism. Standards for testing
urinary metabolites often require multiple spot sam-ples with the same volunteers over a period of time
to verify that the metabolites are being continually
produced and to see whether levels fluctuate with
changes in chemical use (Calafat 2016 ). Evaluating
the ways in which herbicides interact with the body
is even more challenging (McCally 2002 ). There is
no readily available rapid test for herbicide exposure.
Glyphosate, for example, has a limited residence
time the body —meaning that a few weeks after an
acute exposure event, there could be no measurable
trace in the body. There is no scientific consensuson the impacts of glyphosate exposure or at what
level that exposure might be harmful.
6There is also
no consistently predictable relationship between lev-
els of herbicides, their breakdown products in urine,
and health outcomes. That is, although evidence of
exposure is one thing, the latency and the number
of variables between exposure and the eventual
health outcomes are far apart and difficult to trace
without conducting expensive, large- ncohort studies.
To produce certainty here one would need years to
decades and several hundred thousand dollars for anepidemiological study —an ethically questionable
endeavor in a place where seasonal hunger is a real-
ity and poverty, not exposure, was the priority for
the vast majority of farmers. Even that might not do
it, given the complex mediation betweenagrichemicals, economic resources, social lives, and
lingering toxicological uncertainty.
Several NGO workers told me that such extensive
efforts to document herbicides in the body were notworth it. As one NGO worker told me,
One of the most frustrating things to do is to find out
how bad it is. I don ’t think I am the only one. I talked to
one [toxicologist]. I talked to her on the phone a few
weeks ago. I asked her about this, how to detect
glyphosate. She said, “You called me again about this
thing?! ”I said “I don ’t have anybody else to consult. ”
She said, “I am giving up too. ”I said “Why? You are the
only one I know going after this. ”She said, “The more I
did it, it is the same result. ”The result is everyone has it
but nobody cares (Interview with NGO worker.
Bangkok, Thailand. Interviewed June 3, 2017).
To be clear, it was not that “nobody cared ”about
agrichemicals. Farmers most certainly were con-cerned, but given the pressures of trying to make aliving in a low-end global commodity chain, expo-sure was seen by many as a fact of life. Wealthierfarmers, however, almost all paid others to spray forthem. Spray crews in the part of the country where Iwas working were majority indigenous Khmu, newlylandless or land poor in a region where landlessnesswas a new phenomenon, and were broadly stigma-tized as lazy, drunk, and addicted. Accidents andpoisonings were written off because sprayers wereoften seen as inherently risky people (Shattuck
2019 ). Impacts to their bodies were invisibilized in
their own communities by the fact of their socialmarginalization (Shattuck 2019 ). Even locally, their
bodies did not count.
In Xieng Khouang, it was difficult to have a con-
versation about pesticides without talking about thebroader scale agrarian changes that had very recentlyreordered the relations between upland people andtheir environments. The area had been a center ofopium production under the French. High-value tim-ber and then nontimber forest products were logged
out in the early 2000s; opium was completely
banned in 2006. The maize boom followed. Maizeand herbicides allowed communities to siphon valuefrom the soil fertility left as forests were cleared inthe absence of other ways to get cash. The first fewyears were good; some families even sent their chil-dren to college. Average household income in thebetter-off of my survey villages ten years later, how-ever, amounted to about $1.28 per person per day.Most people were just holding on.224 Shattuck
A sprayer I will call Joy exemplifies this contra-
diction of economic transformation, bodily exposure,
and social invisibility. Joy ’s brother passed away
young from liver disease. One day she told me this
was because he worked a spray crew and was the first
in the village to buy a spray pump; other days shesaid it was because he had a drinking problem.
There was no way to know whether it was either.
Joy was also one of the only women who sprayed for
a living. Her hard work in a “man’s occupation ”
earned her respect in the village, a place in the localwomen ’s union usually reserved for elites, and some
crucial financial independence from an alcoholic
husband. Exposure helped her create a life worth liv-ing for her kids, even if it was a life most likely
altered by the chemicals she worked with every day.
Murphy ’s(2017 , 497) concept of “alterlives ”is par-
ticularly apt here. Alterlives “includes being in the
mess of consumption, subsistence, and side effect,being in the contradictions of existing in worlds that
demand chemical exposures as the conditions for
eating, drinking, breathing. ”Murphy talked about
“resurgent life, ”about making it work through expo-
sure, resisting the label of damaged, still document-
ing and holding to account actors for the harms of
colonial and extractive regimes. Joy —smart, indomi-
table, fabulous karaoke singer that she is —reminded
me of this. Two points are salient here. First, the
impact to her body, and to her brother ’s body, will
never be counted. As a marginalized, near-landlessfarmer, she does not count politically. Second, by
accepting exposure as a fact of life, by using such
exposure to improve her life, the bodily impactbecomes even less visible but no less real than the
changes in her economic fortunes. Agrichemicals
might have been a positive force in her life for some
years, and we can acknowledge this, we can admire
her strength and resourcefulness, without letting goof the injustice of an agrarian system in which expo-
sure is a condition for making her way through life.
The entrance of agrichemicals in Xieng Khouang
has reconfigured individual health profiles like Joy ’si n
ways that are unpredictable. Agrarian systems, like
other environments, can be imagined as emergentecologies (Murphy 2006 ) of land, people, agrichemi-
cals, microorganisms (like the liver flukes that cause
so much liver disease), access to nutrition, economic
resources, and social lives. These factors can interact
in ways that manifest differently in different bodies atdifferent times. This points to the benefit of pursuingexplanation and problem solving at the scale of emer-
gent properties —an increasingly important concept in
health geographies (Senanayake and King 2019 ). A
faithful empirical accounting of impact here requires an
approach that acknowledges the political invisibility ofthe affected bodies and addresses this emergent ecology
of exposure as a whole.
Epistemic Emergence and the Politics of
Imperceptibility
I was discussing pesticide residue data and govern-
ment plans to act on them with one of the white
development workers involved in the data collec-
tion. He was asking me about how they should com-
municate the results of the urine tests to farmers. I
began to explain about the uncertainties inherent in
the methods they had used. “Are we ever going to
be able to conclude anything? The headline figuresare obviously useful for awareness raising and stirring
up interest among the donors and policymakers. But
we are lucky there is nobody else. …who knows
the subject well enough to realize how unreliable all
this data really is. ”(Email communication with
NGO worker, Vientiane, Laos: March 31st 2017).
Months later I reminded him about that exchange
and asked how civil society is to know that a prob-
lem actually exists or how severe it is. He seemed
confident that given the data collected by both
NGOs and local government, given the consistent
picture painted by data from multiple sources includ-ing from over the border in Thailand, and given
what is visible in the field, that there was certainly
evidence of a problem worth solving, even if none
of that evidence could stand on its own. The gov-
ernment officials I discussed these data with largely
agreed. The blood tests on their own were one
thing. Combined with the lab analyses of urine, soil,
and water samples; observations of the conditions
under which pesticides are used; anecdotes aboutpoisoning deaths that never make it into hospital
records, these forms of partial knowledge point in
the same direction. Then there are the data from
different epistemic starting points: the broader con-
text of agrarian change in the region, stories like
Joy’s, the social conditions that further invisibilized
pesticide applicators, and the overall precarity of theagrarian system. These different epistemic starting
points help explain why exposure is both common
and locally imperceptible.Toxic Uncertainties and Epistemic Emergence 225
The ability to decide what kinds of knowledge
count and what constitutes proof is itself a terrain of
struggle. As Bourdieu ( 1975 ) explained, “The scien-
tific field is the locus of a competitive struggle, in
which the specific issue at stake is the monopoly of
scientific authority ”(19). Paired with data from con-
ventional toxicology and epidemiology studies that
predict neurodevelopmental impacts in children
exposed to organophosphates and potential adverse
birth outcomes for exposed pregnant women, the
data my NGO colleagues collected in Laos pose apolitical question as much as a scientific one. Their
combination of traditional methods, like the labora-
tory urine analyses, with the cheaper test kits, com-parison with regional results, and qualitative data
about use, exposure, poisonings, and the way in
which agrichemicals interact with poverty show that
those impacts are likely widespread. Even if they are
not reliable enough to pin down the precise magni-tude of the problem, the question is how much it
matters. If the biomonitoring data on children in
Laos are off significantly —say one in five children is
exposed at risky levels instead of one in three —how
much does that difference matter? Asking such ques-
tions points us less to scientific uncertainty and
more toward political contestation.
The uneven production of scientific knowledge
and the agnogenic nature of agrochemical
harms mean that the kind of certainty called for by
traditional regulatory science is likely to remain unat-tainable —especially in places like Laos. The episte-
mological form in which the problem is defined and
argued by such actors is still rooted in the limitedvision of early regulatory science when a linear cause
and effect could be quantified and environments were
imagined as ontologically separate from bodies. As
Carolan ( 2008 , 734) noted, “Beyond being an impos-
sible task, the goal of more science in the name ofrelinquishing uncertainty is also (often) a meaningless
one. For such an expectation is based upon the false
belief that such debates reside in questions of purefact, rather than realizing that their roots lie (in most
cases at least) within differing value orientations. ”
Truly comprehensive risk assessment requires bothquantitative and qualitative, both standardized and
nonstandardized, both seemingly universal and obvi-
ously situated forms of data. The question then is
this: Taking many forms of evidence together, how
much of what kinds of evidence is enough to articu-late harm to bodies that are often invisibilized?Working with uncertainty then requires that we
look at many kinds of partial, situated, and imperfect
data in relation. Although this kind of triangulation
is not standard in regulatory science or the gover-
nance of chemicals, different kinds of evidence can
“interlock in a manner that makes the whole episte-
mologically greater than the sum of its parts ”
(Carolan 2008 , 733). This epistemic emergence —
using multidisciplinary work and multiple forms of
knowledge in relation with established fields to cre-
ate a way of knowing that is greater than the sum of
its parts —could make harms perceptible enough for
action. This approach could be a complement to
civic science and public epidemiology approaches in
that it takes into account the whole emergent ecol-
ogy in which exposures occur, the nonpredictable
ways in which such exposures reconfigure individual
health profiles, and how exposure interacts withsocial lives. Most crucial, epistemic emergence does
not rely on moving up from lay to expert methods
necessarily, instead asking what forms of knowledge
might make harm articulate enough for action in a
particular context.
Epistemic emergence as a concept is grounded in
the politics of social negotiation, the question ofwhat kind of knowledge might matter to whom, and
the acknowledgment of the whole ecology in which
exposure becomes a condition for resurgent life. The
relationship between knowledge and action is not
straightforward. What knowledge (if any) can make
harm to marginalized bodies count differs dramatically
by context. In this case, the biomonitoring and
related data were put to work in multiple ways at dif-
ferent scales: from community education and partici-
patory extension efforts, to discussions with
agricultural extension workers about how to transition
not to safer pesticide use but to farming systems that
required fewer pesticides, development industry efforts
to support organics, and regional advocacy aimed at
informing governments with more regulatory power
and influence over the pesticide industry (in this case
Thailand and Vietnam; see Jatiket et al. 2018 ). In
some venues the value of the data was largely discur-
sive, but given the widely recognized unevenness in
available resources for toxicology and epidemiology,
the data were also the best available in Laos with
which to make decisions —and many government offi-
cials I interviewed took it quite seriously.
More broadly, greater reliance on epistemic emer-
gence could be one way of articulating the diffuse226 Shattuck
forms of environmental harm that constitute much
of our bodily interactions in an already contami-nated world. Instead of the “germ by germ, chemical
by chemical ”approach of the past (Nash 2008 , 557),
we might think about the transformative comingtogether of bodies and environments and socialitiesthat (agri)chemicals allow and what work they do,how they produce different embodiments and subjec-tivities, to paraphrase Agard-Jones ( 2013 ). The pre-
vious generation of regulatory science has insisted onan ontological clarity that is no longer adequate —
and likely never was. I would argue that we havereached a place in the history of environmentalproblems where our own commonsense ontologieshave been undermined —where the boundaries
between bodies and chemicals and environmentshave blurred to the point that holding actorsaccountable in the traditional mode is ever lesslikely. The realities of life in an already contami-nated world, like the ubiquity of agrichemical use,require that we rethink the relationships betweenbodies and ecologies, between people and nature, innondualist, radically open ways. If we can moveaway from the chemical as an ontologically separatething with its own inherent risks to include anassessment of the complex relations between chemi-cals, bodies, socialities, and environments, we canhave a more honest discussion of risk and impact —
and articulate that impact in ways that might helpbring into being different relations between bodiesand environment, people, and land.
Acknowledgments
Becky Mansfield, Alastair Iles, Jake Kosek, Maywa
Montenegro, and the Skagen III Workshop on Landand Environments all gave valuable feedback on ear-lier versions of this article. Mistakes and omissionsare all mine.
Note
1. The public debates on agrichemicals cover a tiny
portion of the more than 10,000 pesticides thatare still approved in the United States under“conditional registration ”—pesticides for which
companies promised to provide missing toxicologicaland environmental impact data in the 1970s, 1980s,
and 1990s but never did (Iles 2018 ). Although these
might (or might not) be adequately testedindividually, they are seldom tested in terms of their“cocktail effect ”(Meeker, Sathyanarayana, and
Swan 2009 ).
2. Although the Agricultural Cohort Study has not
found evidence to support a link between non-Hodgkin ’s lymphoma and glyphosate, other
epidemiological studies have (Eriksson et al. 2008 ;
Schinasi and Leon 2014 ).
3. I calculated this number based on the total pesticide
use the Lao Ministry of Agriculture reported to theUN Food and Agriculture Organization (UNFAO)for 2006 —4.3metric tons (FAOSTAT 2019 ). The
2016 figure at the time of writing had not been
reported to the UNFAO. I used the figure (136.247metric tons) given in a public presentation by thedirector of the Regulatory Division for theDepartment of Agriculture (Souvandoune 2017 ).
4. The group chose to focus on organophosphates and
carbamates because of their ubiquity and their
relative technical legibility. Carbamates and
organophosphates act on the nervous system andcan be detected by the activity of the enzymecholinesterase, which carries signals across nerveendings. Common herbicides, however, have nosuch inexpensive way of measuring their mark onthe body in low doses.
5. I was not present to observe these tests and did not
conduct or directly observe any biomonitoring withhuman subjects or collect data in schools directly. Iinterviewed practitioners about the process of testingand participated in public government andcommunity meetings where the data were discussed.Data stripped of personally identifiable informationthat were gathered through these awareness-raisingactivities were shared with me after the fact.
6. Glyphosate is currently the subject of intense
scientific controversy after the International Agency
for Cancer Research declared it a likely carcinogenand the State of California followed suit. TheEuropean Union and the U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency have reached opposite conclusions.
References
Admassie, A., and A. S. Bedi. 2003 . Attending school:
Two “R’s”and child work in rural Ethiopia. Working
Paper Series No. 387, Institute of Social Studies, TheHague, The Netherlands. Accessed May 21, 2020.https://repub.eur.nl/pub/19146/wp387.pdf .
Aga, A. 2019 . The marketing of agri-chemicals in
Maharashtra, India: Theorizing graded informality.
Journal of Peasant Studies 46 (7):1458 –1476. 10.1080/
03066150.2018.1534833 .
Agard-Jones, V. 2013 . Bodies in the system. Small Axe: A
Caribbean Journal of Criticism 17 (3):182 –92. doi: 10.
1215/07990537-2378991 .
Alavanja, M. C. R. 2009 . Introduction: Pesticides use and
exposure extensive worldwide. Reviews on
Environmental Health 24 (4):303 –9. doi: 10.1515/
reveh.2009.24.4.303 .
Asai, H. 2016. Labor saving practices for external exten-
sion of slash-and-burn upland rice agriculture in Laos.Toxic Uncertainties and Epistemic Emergence 227
Study Sessions on Land Use Planning, Land Issues
Working Group, October 5.
Barraza, D., K. Jansen, B. van Wendel de Joode, and C.
Wesseling. 2011 . Pesticide use in banana and plantain
production and risk perception among local actors inTalamanca, Costa Rica. Environmental Research 111
(5):708 –17. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2011.02.009 .
Bickel, U. 2018 . Uso de plaguicidas por productores famil-
iares en Bolivia impactos en la salud, los ecosistemasy la econom /C19ıa campesina: Alternativas agroecol /C19ogicas
y conclusiones para lograr una orientaci /C19on hac /C19ıa una
mayor sostenibilidad. [The use of pesticides by familyfarmers in Bolivia: Impacts on health, ecosystems,
and rural economies; Agroecological alternatives and
conclusions to achieve greater sustainability.] MAthesis, Universit €at Rostock.
Bienkowski, B. 2018 . Glyphosate linked to shorter preg-
nancies in Indiana women. Environmental Health
News , March 16. May 20, 2020. http://www.ehn.org/
glyphosate-linked-to-shorter-pregnancies-in-indiana-
women-2548295803.html .
Black, A. P., P. Nouanthong, N. Nanthavong, C.
Souvannaso, K. Vilivong, P. Jutavijittum, B.Samountry, N. Lutteke, J. M. Hubschen, S. Goossens,
et al. 2014 . Hepatitis B virus in the Lao People ’s
Democratic Republic: A cross sectional serosurvey indifferent cohorts. BMC Infectious Diseases 14:457. doi:
10.1186/1471-2334-14-457 .
Bourdieu, P. 1975 . The specificity of the scientific field
and the social conditions of the progress of reason.
Social Science Information 14 (6):19 –47. doi: 10.1177/
053901847501400602 .
Brown, P. 1992 . Popular epidemiology and toxic waste
contamination: Lay and professional ways of knowing.Journal of Health and Social Behavior 33 (3):267 –81.
doi:10.2307/2137356 .
Brown, P. 2007 .Toxic exposures: Contested illnesses and the
environmental health movement . New York: Columbia
University Press.
Calafat, A. M. 2016 . Contemporary issues in exposure
assessment using biomonitoring. Current Epidemiology
Reports 3( 2 ) : 1 4 5 –53. doi: 10.1007/s40471-016-0075-7 .
Carolan, M. S. 2008 . The bright- and blind-spots of sci-
ence: Why objective knowledge is not enough toresolve environmental controversies. Critical Sociology
34 (5):725 –40. doi: 10.1177/0896920508093365 .
Castellanos-Navarrete, A., and K. Jansen. 2018.I so i lp a l m
expansion a challenge to agroecology? Smallholders
practising industrial farming in Mexico. Journal of
Agrarian Change 18 (1):132 –55. doi: 10.1111/joac.12195 .
Chetty-Mhlanga, S., W. Basera, S. Fuhrimann, N. Probst-
Hensch, S. Delport, M. Mugari, J. Van Wyk, M.
R€o€osli, and M. A. Dalvie. 2018 . A prospective cohort
study of school-going children investigating reproduc-tive and neurobehavioral health effects due to envi-ronmental pesticide exposure in the Western Cape,South Africa: Study protocol. BMC Public Health
18:857. doi: 10.1186/s12889-018-5783-0 .
Davies, T. 2018 . Toxic space and time: Slow violence,
necropolitics, and petrochemical pollution. Annals
of the American Association of Geographers 108
(6):1537 –53. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1470924 .Edmond, Y. 2017 . The effect of agricultural innovation
on school absenteeism in Tanzania. MSc thesis,
Technische Universit €at M€unchen Center of Life and
Food Sciences Weihenstephan.
Eriksson, M., L. Hardell, M. Carlberg, and M. Akerman.
2008 . Pesticide exposure as risk factor for non-
Hodgkin lymphoma including histopathological sub-group analysis. International Journal of Cancer 123
(7):1657 –63. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23589 .
FAOSTAT 2019. Pesticides Trade Database. Accessed 7/26/
2019. http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/RT/visualize .
Fortun, K., and M. Fortun. 2005 . Scientific imaginaries
and ethical plateaus in contemporary U.S. toxicology.
American Anthropologist 107 (1):43 –54. doi: 10.1525/
aa.2005.107.1.043 .
Galt, R. E. 2013 . From homo economicus to complex sub-
jectivities: Reconceptualizing farmers as pesticide
users. Antipode 45 (2):336 –56. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-
8330.2012.01000.x .
Galt, R. E. 2014 .Food systems in an unequal world:
Pesticides, vegetables, and agrarian capitalism in CostaRica. 4th ed. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Gray, L., and B. Dowd-Uribe. 2013
. A political ecology of
socio-economic differentiation: Debt, inputs and lib-
eralization reforms in southwestern Burkina Faso.Journal of Peasant Studies 40 (4):683 –702. doi: 10.
1080/03066150.2013.824425 .
Gunier, R. B., A. Bradman, K. G. Harley, K. Kogut, and
B. Eskenazi. 2017 . Prenatal residential proximity to
agricultural pesticide use and IQ in 7-year-old chil-
dren. Environmental Health Perspectives 125
(5):057002. doi: 10.1289/EHP504 .
Guthman, J., and S. Brown. 2016 . Whose life counts:
Biopolitics and the “bright line ”of chloropicrin miti-
gation in California ’s strawberry industry. Science,
Technology, & Human Values 41 (3):461 –82. doi: 10.
1177/0162243915606804 .
Guthman, J., and B. Mansfield. 2013 . The implications
of environmental epigenetics: A new directionfor geographic inquiry on health, space, and nature –
society relations. Progress in Human Geography 37
(4):486 –504. doi: 10.1177/0309132512463258 .
Haggblade, S., B. Minten, C. Pray, T. Reardon, and D.
Zilberman. 2017 . The herbicide revolution in devel-
oping countries: Patterns, causes, and implications.
The European Journal of Development Research 29
(3):533 –59. doi: 10.1057/s41287-017-0090-7 .
Haraway, D. 1988. Situated knowledges: The science ques-
tion in feminism and the privilege of partial perspective.
Feminist Studies 14 (3):575 –99. doi: 10.2307/3178066 .
Harrison, J. L. 2006.A c c i d e n t s ’and invisibilities: Scaled
discourse and the naturalization of regulatory neglect in
California ’s pesticide drift conflict. Political Geography
25 (5):506 –29. doi: 10.1016/j.polgeo.2006.02.003 .
Hepler-Smith, E. 2019 . Molecular bureaucracy:
Toxicological information and environmental protec-
tion. Environmental History 24 (3):534 –60. doi: 10.
1093/envhis/emy134 .
Hess, D. J. 2009 . The potentials and limitations of civil
society research: Getting undone science done.
Sociological Inquiry 79 (3):306 –27. doi: 10.1111/j.
1475-682X.2009.00292.x .228 Shattuck
Iles, A. 2007. Identifying environmental health risks in con-
sumer products: Non-governmental organizations and
civic epistemologies. Public Understanding of Science 16
(4):371 –91. doi: 10.1177/0963662505059442 .
Iles, A. 2018 . Whitewash: The story of a weed killer, can-
cer, and the corruption of science. Agroecology and
Sustainable Food Systems 42 (7):834 –37. doi: 10.1080/
21683565.2018.1461167 .
Jackson, P., and A. H. Neely. 2015 . Triangulating health:
Toward a practice of a political ecology of health.Progress in Human Geography 39 (1):47 –64. doi: 10.
1177/0309132513518832 .
Jatiket, M., S. Hongsibsong, S. Nillit, and P. N. Pearcy.
2018 . Pesticide use in Southeast Asia: Health impacts
on school children. Briefing Note, The Field Allianceand Thai Education Foundation, Bangkok, Thailand.
King, B. 2010 . Political ecologies of health. Progress in
Human Geography 34 (1):38 –55. doi: 10.1177/
0309132509338642 .
Kroll-Smith, S., and H. H. Floyd. 2000 .Bodies in protest:
Environmental illness and the struggle over medical
knowledge . New York: NYU Press.
Latour, B. 1987 .Science in action: How to follow scientists
and engineers through society . Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Latour, B. 1992 . Give me a Laboratory and I Will Raise
the World . M. Biagol (ed.) The Science Studies
Reader, pp. 258 –75. Routledge: New York.
Latour, B. 2009 .Politics of nature . Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Lerner, S. 2017. 100,000 Pages of chemical indu stry secrets
gathered dust in an Oregon barn for decades —Until now.
The Intercept , July 26 2019. https://theintercept.com/
2017/07/26/chemical-industry-herbicide-poison-papers/ .
Liboiron, M. 2015 . Redefining pollution and action: The
matter of plastics. Material Culture 21 (1):1 –24. doi:
10.1177/1359183515622966 .
London, L., and R. Bailie. 2001 . Challenges for improving
surveillance for pesticide poisoning: Policy implica-
tions for developing countries. International Journal of
Epidemiology 30 (3):564 –70. doi: 10.1093/ije/30.3.564 .
Luna, J. K. 2018 . Getting out of the dirt: Racialized
modernity and environmental inequality in the cot-ton sector of Burkina Faso. Environmental Sociology 4
(2):221 –34. doi: 10.1080/23251042.2017.1396657 .
Mansfield, B. 2012 . Environmental health as biosecurity:
“Seafood choices, ”risk, and the pregnant woman as
threshold. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers 102 (5):969 –76. doi: 10.1080/00045608.
2012.657496 .
Markowitz, G. E., and D. Rosner. 2002.Deceit and denial: The
deadly politics of industrial pollution. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press. doi: 10.1086/ahr/109.2.567 .
McCally, M. 2002 .Life support: The environment and
human health . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Meeker, J. D., S. Sathyanarayana, and S. H. Swan. 2009 .
Phthalates and other additives in plastics: Human
exposure and associated health outcomes. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences364 (1526):2097 –113. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0268 .Murphy, M. 2006 .Sick building syndrome and the problem of
uncertainty: Environmental politics, technoscience, and
women workers. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Murphy, M. 2017 . Alterlife and decolonial chemical rela-
tions. Cultural Anthropology 32 (4):494 –503. doi: 10.
14506/ca32.4.02 .
Murray, D. 1994 .Cultivating crisis: The human cost of pesticides
in Latin America . Austin: University of Texas Press.
Murray, D., C. Wesseling, M. Keifer, M. Corriols, and S.
Henao. 2002. Surveillance of pesticide-related illness in
the developing world: Putting the data to work.
International Journal of Occupational and EnvironmentalHealth 8 (3):243 –48. doi: 10.1179/107735202800338830 .
Naidoo, S., A. Burdorf, H. Kromhout, J. Kvalsvig, L.
Mubaiwa, B. Sartorius, and M. Taylor. 2016 . Sonke
project: A cohort study of the impact of pesticides on
women and children in South Africa. Occupational
and Environmental Medicine 73 (Suppl. 1):A84 –85.10.
1136/oemed-2016-103951.227 .
Naksen, W., T. Prapamontol, A. Mangklabruks, S.
Chantara, P. Thavornyutikarn, N. Srinual, P.Panuwet, P. Barry Ryan, A. M. Riederer, and D. B.Barr. 2015 . Associations of maternal organophosphate
pesticide exposure and PON1 activity with birth out-
comes in SAWASDEE birth cohort, Thailand.Environmental Research 142 (October):288 –96. doi:
10.1016/j.envres.2015.06.035 .
Nash, L. 2004 . The fruits of ill-health: Pesticides and
workers ’bodies in post –World War II California.
Osiris 19 (January):203 –19. doi: 10.1086/649402 .
Nash, L. 2008 . Purity and danger: Historical reflections
on the regulation of environmental pollutants.
Environmental History 13 (4):651 –58.
National Institutes of Health. 2018 . Project Number
1R01ES026082-01A1: Impact of prenatal insecticideexposure on neurodevelopmental trajectories in a
Thai birth cohort: Building exposure science and neu-
rodevelopmental research capacity in Thailand. NIHRePORTER, NIH Research Portfolio OnlineReporting Tools Expenditures and Results. July 262019. https://projectreporter.nih.gov/project_info_
description.cfm?aid=9202299&icde=41424894 .
National Library of Medicine. n.d. Lead arsenate:
CASRN: 7784-40-9. ToxNet Toxicology DataNetwork, National Institute of Health, Washington,
DC. July 26 2019. https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/
sis/search/a?dbs+hsdb: @term+ @DOCNO + 1648 .
Nelson, W. C., M. H. Lykins, J. Mackey, V. A. Newill,
J. F. Finklea, and D. I. Hammer. 1973 . Mortality
among orchard workers exposed to lead arsenate
spray: A cohort study. Journal of Chronic Diseases 26
(2):105 –18. doi: 10.1016/0021-9681(73)90009-X .
Oreskes, N., and E. M. Conway. 2010 .Merchants of doubt:
How a handful of scientists obscured the truth on issues
from tobacco smoke to global warming . New York:
Bloomsbury.
Ottiger, F. 2018 . Resource use intensity in different food
systems in the north-western Mount Kenya region.
MA thesis, University of Bern.
Ottinger, G., and B. R. Cohen. 2011 .Technoscience and
environmental justice: Expert cultures in a grassrootsmovement . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Toxic Uncertainties and Epistemic Emergence 229
Patarasiriwong, V. 2017 .การศึกษาพัฒนาแนวทางการจ ัด
การความเส ี ยงจากสารเคม ีกำจัดศัตรูพืชกลุ มออร 
กาโนฟอสเฟตในพ ื นที ภาคเหนือตอนบนด วยกระบวนกา
รวิจัยแบบมีส วนร วม ปีที 2:จังหวัดลำพูนและจังหวัด
ลำปาง . Study on risk management of organo-
phosphate pesticides in the Northern Region:Participatory research year two. Department ofEnvironmental Quality Promotion, Ministry ofNational Resources and Environment, RoyalThai Government. Bangkok.
Peterman, A., J. A. Behrman, and A. R. Quisumbing.
2014 . A review of empirical evidence on gender dif-
ferences in nonland agricultural inputs, technology,and services in developing countries. In Gender in
agriculture: Closing the knowledge gap , ed. A. R.
Quisumbing, R. Meinzen-Dick, T. L. Raney, A.Croppenstedt, J. A. Behrman, and A. Peterman,145–86. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Proctor, R., and L. L. Schiebinger. 2008 .Agnotology: The
making and unmaking of ignorance . Palo Alto, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Ramachandran, J., K. G. Sajith, S. Priya, A. Dutta, and
K. A. Balasubramanian. 2014 . Serum cholinesterase is
an excellent biomarker of liver cirrhosis. Tropical
Gastroenterology 35 (1):15 –20. doi: 10.7869/tg.158 .
Rassapong, S., C. Syfongxay, I. Phanthanivong, B.
Syhalad, S. Phinmahthut, T. Manyvong, B.Keothongkham, H. Surat, A. Shattuck, and A.Bartlett. 2018
. Pesticide use in Lao PDR: Health and
environmental impacts. Helvetas, Sub-sector WorkingGroup for Farmers and Agribusiness, Lao PDR.
Romero, A. M., J. Guthman, R. E. Galt, M. Huber, B.
Mansfield, and S. Sawyer. 2017 . Chemical geogra-
phies. GeoHumanities 3 (1):158 –77. doi: 10.1080/
2373566X.2017.1298972 .
Rural Development Sole. 2016 . Rural ecological agriculture
for livelihood project: The Annual Report Jan. –Dec.
2016. Vientiane, Laos: RDS and The Field Alliance.
Ryan, P. B., T. Prapamontol, P. Panuwet, S. Hongsibsong,
W. Naksen, N. Srinual, T. Kerdnoi, G. Bernoudy, P.D’Souza, R. E. Hunter Jr, et al. 2012 . Study of Asian
women, offspring development and environmental
exposure (SAWASDEE) pesticide exposure and neu-
rodevelopmental effects in a Thai birth cohort.Epidemiology 23 (5 Suppl.):1. doi: 10.1097/01.ede.
0000416702.24646.91 .
Schinasi, L., and M. E. Leon. 2014 . Non-Hodgkin lym-
phoma and occupational exposure to agricultural pes-ticide chemical groups and active ingredients: Asystematic review and meta-analysis. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 11
(4):4449 –527. doi: 10.3390/ijerph110404449 .
Schreinemachers, P., and P. Tipraqsa. 2012 . Agricultural
pesticides and land ise intensification in high, middleand low income countries. Food Policy 37 (6):616 –26.
doi:10.1016/j.foodpol.2012.06.003 .Senanayake, N., and B. King. 2019 . Health –environment
futures: Complexity, uncertainty, and bodies. Progress
in Human Geography 43 (4):711 –28. doi: 10.1177/
0309132517743322 .
Shapiro, N., N. Zakariya, and J. Roberts. 2017 . A wary
alliance: From enumerating the environment to invit-ing apprehension. Engaging Science, Technology, and
Society 3:575 –602. doi: 10.17351/ests2017.133 .
Shattuck, A. 2019 . Risky subjects: Embodiment and par-
tial knowledges in the safe use of pesticide. Geoforum .
doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2019.04.029 .
Souvandoune, S. 2017 . Status of pesticide management in
Lao PDR. Paper presented at the Workshop onPM-Decree on Pesticide Management in Lao PDR,Muang Thang Vientiane Hotel, Lao PDR, October24.
Stone, G. 2014 . Biosecurity in the age of genetic engi-
neering. In Bioinsecurity and vulnerability , ed. N. N.
Chen and L. A. Sharp, 71 –86. Santa Fe, NM: School
for Advanced Research Press.
Sultana, F. 2012 . Producing contaminated citizens:
Toward a nature –society geography of health and
well-being. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers 102 (5):1165 –72. doi: 10.1080/00045608.
2012.671127 .
UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food. 2017 .
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right toFood. New York: United Nations General AssemblyHuman Rights Council, Thirty-Fourth Session.
Wesseling, C., R. McConnell, T. Partanen, and C.
Hogstedt. 1997 . Agricultural pesticide use in develop-
ing countries: Health effects and research needs.
International Journal of Health Services 27 (2):273 –308.
doi:10.2190/E259-N3AH-TA1Y-H591 .
Whorton, J. C. 1975.Before Silent Spring: Pesticides and public
health in pre-DDT America . Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. doi: 10.1086/ahr/81.3.679-a .
World Bank. 2008 .World development report: Agriculture
for development . Washington, DC: The World Bank
Group.
World Bank. 2019. Employment in agriculture (% of total
employment) (Modeled ILO estimate) jData, 2019.
July 26 2019. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.
AGR.EMPL.ZS.
Wylie, S., N. Shapiro, and M. Liboiron. 2017 . Making
and doing politics through grassroots scientific
research on the energy and petrochemical industries.
Engaging Science, Technology, and Society 3:393 –425.
doi:10.17351/ests2017.134 .
ANNIE SHATTUCK is an Assistant Professor of
Geography at Indiana University, Bloomington, IN
47405. E-mail: shattuck@iu.edu . Her research engages
agrarian change, food politics, and rural health.230 Shattuck
Copyright
of
Annals
of
the
American
Association
of
Geographers
is
the
property
of
Taylor
&
Francis
Ltd
and
its
content
may
not
be
copied
or
emailed
to
multiple
sites
or
posted
to
a
listserv
without
the
copyright
holder's
express
written
permission.
However,
users
may
print,
download,
or
email
articles
for
individual
use.

JANE BENNETT

Vibrant Matter
A Political Ecology of Things

Duke University Press Durham and London 2010


The Agency of Assemblages

Thing-power perhaps has the rhetorical advantage of calling to mind a
childhood sense of the world as filled with all sorts of animate beings,
some human, some not, some organic, some not. It draws attention to
an efficacy of objects in excess of the human meanings, designs, or pur-
poses they express or serve. Thing-power may thus be a good starting
point for thinking beyond the life-matter binary, the dominant organi-
zational principle of adult experience. The term's disadvantage, how-
ever, is that it also tends to overstate the thinginess or fixed stability of
materiality, whereas my goal is to theorize a materiality that is as much
force as entity, as much energy as matter, as much intensity as extension.
Here the term out-side may prove more apt. Spinoza’s stones, an abso-
lute Wild, the oozing Meadowlands, the nimble Odradek, the moving
deodand, a processual minerality, an incalculable nonidentity—none
of these are passive objects or stable entities (though neither are they
intentional subjects).' They allude instead to vibrant materials.
A second, related disadvantage of thing-power is its latent individual-
ism, by which I mean the way in which the figure of “thing” lends itself
to an atomistic rather than a congregational understanding of agency.

the agency of assemblages 21

While the smallest or simplest body or bit may indeed express a vital
impetus, conatus or clinamen, an actant never really acts alone. Its effi-
cacy or agency always depends on the collaboration, cooperation, or
interactive interference of many bodies and forces. A lot happens to
the concept of agency once nonhuman things are figured less as social
constructions and more as actors, and once humans themselves are as-
sessed not as autonoms but as vital materialities.

In this chapter I will try to develop a theory of distributive agency by
examining a real-life effect: a power blackout that affected 50 million
people in North America in 2003. I will offeran analysis of the electrical
power grid as an agentic assemblage. How does the agency of assem-
blages compare to more familiar theories of action, such as those cen-
tered around human will or intentionality, or around intersubjectivity,
or around (human) social, economic, or discursive structures? And how
would an understanding of agency as a confederation of human and
nonhuman elements alter established notions of moral responsibility
and political accountability?

Two philosophical concepts are important to my response to these
questions: Spinoza’s “affective” bodies and Gilles Deleuze and Félix
Guattari’s “assemblage.” I will therefore offer a brief exposition of these
concepts before I turn to an account of the power blackout that tries to
take the out-side seriously and tries to remain faithful to the distributive
quality of “agency.”

Affective Bodies ss

Spinoza's conative bodies are also associative or (one could even say)
social bodies, in the sense that each is, by its very nature as a body,
continuously affecting and being affected by other bodies. Deleuze ex-
plicates this point: the power of a body to affect other bodies includes a
“corresponding and inseparable” capacity to be affected; “there are two
equally actual powers, that of acting, and that of suffering action, which
vary inversely one to the other, but whose sum is both constant and
constantly effective.”? Spinoza’s conative, encounter-prone body arises
in the context of an ontological vision according to which all things are

- “modes” of a common “substance”? Any specific thing —“a shoe, a ship,

a cabbage, a king” (to use Martin Lin’s list)* or a glove, a rat, a cap, and


22 chapter 2

the human narrator of their vitality (to use my list)—is neither subject
nor object but a “mode” of what Spinoza calls “Deus sive Natura” (God
or Nature)

Spinoza also says that every mode is itself a mosaic or assemblage of
many simple bodies, or, as Deleuze describes it, there are for Spinoza no
“existing modes that are not actually composed of a very great number
of extensive parts,” parts that “come to it from elsewhere.”® It is inter-
esting that Lucretius, too, saw mosaicism as the way things essentially
are: “It is right to have this truth . . . surely sealed and to keep it stored
in your remembering mind, that there is not one of all the things, whose
nature is seen before our face, which is built of one kind of primordia,
nor anything which is not created of well-mingled seed.” Lucretius links
the degree of internal diversity to the degree of power possessed by the
thing: “And whatever possesses within it more forces and powers, it thus

shows that there are in it most kinds of primordia and diverse shapes.”
Spinoza, as we shall see, makes a similar point.

For Spinoza, both simple bodies (which are perhaps better termed
protobodies) and the complex or mosaicized modes they form are cona-
tive. In the case of the former, conatus is expressed as a stubbornness
or inertial tendency to persist; in the case of a complex body or mode,
conatus refers to the effort required to maintain the specific relation of
“movement and rest” that obtains between its parts, a relation that de-
fines the mode as what it is. This maintenance is not a process of mere
repetition of the same, for it entails continual invention: because each
mode suffers the actions on it by other modes, actions that disrupt the
relation of movement and rest characterizing each mode, every mode,
if it is to persist, must seek new encounters to creatively compensate
for the alterations or affections it suffers. What it means to be a “mode,”
then, is to form alliances and enter assemblages: it is to mod(e)ify and
be modified by others. The process of modification is not under the con-

trol of any one mode—no mode is an agent in.the hierarchical sense.

Neither is the process without tension, for each mode vies with and

against the (changing) affections of (a changing set of) other modes, all

the while being subject to the element of chance or contingency intrin-
sic to any encounter.’

Conative substance turns itself into confederate bodies, that is, com-
plex bodies that in turn congregate with each other in the pursuit of
the enhancement of their power. Spinoza believes, for example, that the

the agency of assemblages 23

more kinds of bodies with which a body can affiliate, the better: “As the
body is more capable of being affected in many ways and of affecting
external bodies . . . so the mind is more capable of thinking”

The key idea I want to take from Spinoza’s rich and contestable phi-
losophy, an idea I will put to work for a vital materialism, is this: bodies
enhance their power in or as a heterogeneous assemblage. What this sug-
gests for the concept of agency is that the efficacy or effectivity to which
that term has traditionally referred becomes distributed across an onto-
logically heterogeneous field, rather than being a capacity localized.in
a human body or in a collective produced (only) by human efforts. The
sentences of this book also emerged from the confederate agency of
many striving macro- and microactants: from “my” memories, inten-
tions, contentions, intestinal bacteria, eyeglasses, and blood sugar, as
well as from the plastic computer keyboard, the bird song from the open
window, or the air or particulates in the room, to name only a few of the
participants. What is at work here on the page is an animal-vegetable-
mineral-sonority cluster with a particular degree and duration of power.
What is at work here is what Deleuze and Guattari call an assemblage.

What Is an Assemblage?

At the end of the twentieth century, the arena in which stuff happens —
What the military calls the “theater of operations” seemed to many
. people to have expanded dramatically. “Globalization” had occurred and
the earth itself had become a space of events. ‘The parts of this giant
_ whole were both intimately interconnected and highly conflictual. This
fact— of the coexistence of mutual dependency with friction and vio-
lence between parts—called for new conceptualizations of the part-
whole relation. Organicist models, in which each member obediently
serves the whole, were clearly out. A host of new ways to name the kind
of relation obtaining between the parts of a volatile but somehow func-
tioning whole were offered: network, meshwork, Empire." My term of
‘choice to describe this event-space and its style of structuration is, fol-
-lowing Deleuze and Guattari, assemblage.
Assemblages are ad hoc groupings of diverse elements, of vibrant
materials of all sorts. Assemblages are living, throbbing confederations
that are able to function despite the persistent presence of energies that


24, chapter 2

confound them from within. They have uneven topographies, because
some of the points at which the various affects and bodies cross paths
are more heavily trafficked than others, and so power is not distributed
equally across its surface. Assemblages are not governed by any central
head: no one materiality or type of material has sufficient competence
to determine consistently the trajectory or impact of the group. The
effects generated by an assemblage are, rather, emergent properties,
emergent in that their ability to make something happen (a newly in-
flected materialism, a blackout, a hurricane, a war on terror) is distinct
from the sum of the vital force of each materiality considered alone.
Each member and proto-member of the assemblage has a certain vital
force, but there is also an effectivity proper to the grouping as such: an
agency of the assemblage. And precisely because each member-actant
maintains an energetic pulse slightly “off” from that of the assemblage,
an assemblage is never a stolid block but an open-ended collective, a
“non-totalizable sum.’* An assemblage thus not only has a distinctive
history of formation but a finite life span.

The electrical power grid offers a good example of an assemblage. It is
a material cluster of charged parts that have indeed affiliated, remaining
in sufficient proximity and coordination to produce distinctive effects.
The elements of the assemblage work together, although their coordina-
tion does not rise to the level of an organism. Rather, its jelling endures
alongside energies and factions that fly out from it and disturb it from
within. And, most important for my purposes, the elements of this as-
semblage, while they include humans and their (social, legal, linguistic)
constructions, also include some very active and powerful nonhumans:
electrons, trees, wind, fire, electromagnetic fields.

The image of affective bodies forming assemblages will enable me to
highlight some of the limitations in human-centered theories of action
and to investigate some of the practical implications, for social-science
inquiry and for public culture, of a theory of action and responsibility
that crosses the human-nonhuman divide.

The Blackout

The International Herald Tribune, on the day after the blackout, reported
that “the vast but shadowy web of transmission lines, power generat-

the agency of assemblages 25

ing plants and substations known as the grid is the biggest gizmo ever
built. . . . on Thursday [14 August 2003], the grid’s heart fluttered. . . .
complicated beyond full understanding, even by experts—[the grid]
lives and occasionally dies by its own mysterious rules.’ To say that
- the grid’s “heart fluttered” or that it “lives and dies by its own rules” is
to anthropomorphize. But anthropomorphizing has, as I shall argue in
- chapter 8, its virtues. Here it works to gesture toward the inadequacy of
understanding the grid simply as a machine ora tool, as, that is, a series
of fixed parts organized from without that serves an external purpose.
To the vital materialist, the electrical grid is better understood as a
volatile mix of coal, sweat, electromagnetic fields, computer programs,
electron streams, profit motives, heat, lifestyles, nuclear fuel, plastic,
fantasies of mastery, static, legislation, water, economic theory, wire,
and wood—to name just some of the actants. There is always some fric-
tion among the parts, but for several days in August 2003 in the United
States and Canada the dissonance was so great that cooperation became
impossible. The North American blackout was the end point of a cas-
cade— of voltage collapses, self-protective withdrawals from the grid,
and human decisions and omissions. The grid includes various valves
and circuit breakers that disconnect parts from the assemblage when-
ever they are threatened by excessive heat. Generating plants, for ex-
ample, shut down just before they are about to go into “full excitation,”
_and they do the same when the “system voltage has become too low to
provide power to the generator’s own auxiliary equipment, such as fans,
coal pulverizers, and pumps.”** What seems to have happened on that
August day was that several initially unrelated generator withdrawals
~ in Ohio and Michigan caused the electron flow pattem to change over
the transmission lines, which led, after a series of events including one
brush fire that burnt a transmission line and then several wire-tree en-
counters, to a successive overloading of other lines and a vortex of dis-
connects. One generating plant after another separated from the grid,
placing more and more stress on the remaining participants. In a one-
minute period, “twenty generators (loaded to 2174 mw) tripped off line
“along Lake Erie””
Investigators still do not understand why the cascade ever stopped
itself, after affecting 50 million people over approximately twenty-four
_ thousand square kilometers and shutting down over one hundred power
: ants, including twenty-two nuclear reactors.” The U.S.-Canada Power


+26 chapter 2

Outage Task Force report was more confident about how the cascade
began, insisting on a variety of agential loci.® These included electricity,
with its internal differentiation into “active” and “reactive” power (more
on this later); the. power plants, understaffed by humans but overpro-
tective in their mechanisms; transmission wires, which tolerate only so
much heat before they refuse to transmit the electron flow; a brush fire
in Ohio; Enron FirstEnergy and other energy-trading corporations, who,
by legal and illegal means, had been milking the grid without main-
taining its infrastructure; consumers, whose demand for electricity
grows and is encouraged to grow by the government without concern
for consequences; and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whose
Energy Policy Act of 1992 deregulated the grid, separated the genera-
tion of electricity from its transmission and distribution, and advanced
the privatization of electricity. Let me say a bit more about the first and
the last of these conative bodies in the assemblage.

First, the nonhuman: electricity. Electricity is a stream of electrons
moving in a current, which is measured in amperes; the force of that
current (the pressure pushing it through the wires) is measured in volts.
Ina system like the North American grid, electrical current and voltage
are constantly oscillating like a pair of waves.” When the two waves are
in phase with each other (rising and falling at exactly the same time),
one has so-called active power, or the type of power used most heavily
by lamps, blow-dryers, and other appliances. But some devices (such
as the electric motors in refrigerators and air conditioners) rely also
on so-called reactive power, where the waves are not in sync. Reactive
power, though it lends no help in physically rotating a motor, is vital
to the active power that accompanies it, for reactive power maintains
the voltage (electricity pressure) needed to sustain the electromagnetic
field required by the system as a whole. If too many devices demand re-
active power, then a deficit is created. One of the causes of the blackout
was a deficit of reactive power. To understand how the deficit occurred,
we need to consider the other actants, including the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission.

In 1992 the commission gained U.S. congressional approval for legis-
lation that sepaxated the production of electricity from its distribution:
companies could now buy electricity from a power plant in one part of
the country and sell it to utilities in geographically distant locations.

the agency of assemblages 27

This greatly increased the long-distance trading of electric power—and
greatly increased the load on transmission wires. But here is the rub: “As
transmission lines become more heavily loaded, they consume more of
the reactive power needed to maintain proper transmission voltage.”**
Reactive power does not travel well, dissipating over distance, so it is
-best if generated close to where it will be used.” Power plants are tech-
nically quite capable of producing extra amounts of reactive power, but
they lack the financial incentive to do so, for reactive-power production
_ reduces the amount of salable power produced. What is more, under
_ the new regulations, transmission companies cannot compel generating
plants to produce the necessary amounts of reactive power

Reactive power, vital to the whole grid, proved a commodity with-
“out profit and thus came in short supply. Here emerged what Garrett
~ Hardin has called a tragedy of the commons. Though rational for each
“user of reactive power to increase its demand for the free commodity,
the aggregate effect is irrational in that it destroys the wellspring: in a
world of finite resources, “freedom in a commons brings ruin to all.”
- The reactive power deficit was an effect unanticipated by human advo-
cates of the regulations that created a huge, continent-wide market in
energy trading. Their actions produced unintended consequences; or, to
put the point in a vital materialist vocabulary, they were subject to the
“slight surprise of action.” The phrase is Bruno Latour’s, and it refers to

an effectivity proper to the action itself, arising only in the doing and
thus in principle independent of any aim, tendency, or characteristic of
the actants: “There is no object, no subject. . . . But there are events. I

ever act; I am always slightly surprised by what I do.’

-Neither, says Latour, is the slight surprise of action confined to.
human action: “That which acts through me is also surprised by what I

do, by the chance to mutate, to change, . . . to bifurcate.””* In the case

at hand, electricity was also an actant, and its strivings also produced.

aleatory effects. For example, “in the case of a power shipment from the

Pacific Northwest to Utah, 33% of the shipment flows through Southern

California and 30% flows through Arizona—far from any conceivable

contract path.’?7 And in August of 2003, after “the transmission lines

along the southern shore of Lake Erie disconnected, the power that had

been flowing along that path” dramatically and surprisingly changed its

behavior: it “immediately reversed direction and began flowing in a giant


i
if

28 chapter 2

loop counterclockwise from Pennsylvania to New York to Ontario and
into Michigan.”* Seeking to minimize the company’s role in the black-
out, aspokesman for FirstEnergy, the Ohio-based company whose East-
lake power plant was an early actant in the cascade and an early target
of blame, said that any analysis needed to “take into account large un-
planned south-to-north power movements that were part ofa phenome-
non known as loop flows, which occur when power takes a route from
producer to buyer different from the intended path.” Electricity, or
the stream of vital materialities called electrons, is always on the move,
always going somewhere, though where this will be is not entirely pre-
dictable. Electricity sometimes goes where we send it, and sometimes it
chooses its path on the spot, in response to the other bodies it encoun-
ters and the surprising opportunities for actions and interactions that
hey afford.

Jn this selective account of the blackout, agency, conceived now
as something distributed along a continuum, extrudes from multiple
sites or many loci—from a quirky electron flow and a spontaneous fire
to members of Congress who have a neoliberal faith in market self-
regulation. How does this view compare to other conceptions of what
an agent is and can do?

c.

The Willing Subject and the Intersubjective Field

T have been suggesting that there is not so much a doer (an agent) be-
bind the deed (the blackout) as a doing and an effecting by a human-
nonhuman assemblage. This federation of actants is a creature that the
concept of moral responsibility fits only loosely and to which the charge
of blame will not quite stick. A certain looseness and slipperiness, often
unnoticed, also characterizes more human-centered notions of agency.
Augustine, for example, linked moral agency to free will, but the human
willis, as Augustine reveals in his Confessions, divided against itself after
the Fall: the will wills even as another part of the will fights that willing.
Moreover, willing agents can act freely only in support of evil: never are
they able by themselves to enact the good, for that always requires the
intervention of divine grace, a force beyond human control. Agency,
then, is not such a clear idea or a self-sufficient power in Augustine?

the agency of assemblages 29

Neither is it in Immanuel Kant. He aspired to define agency in terms
of the autonomous will of the person who submits to the moral law
(whose form is inscribed in human reason). But, as William Connolly
has explored, Kant, too, eventually found the will to be divided against
itself, this time by an innate “propensity” for evil, wherein the will obeys
maxims that derive from the inclinations." It is not merely that the will

" fights against the pressure of an unwilled “sensibility”: the propensity
for evil lives inside the will itself. Human agency again appears as a
vexed concept, though its snarls and dilemmas are easy to skate over
when the alternatives are reduced to either a free human agency or pas-
sive, deterministic matter.

Some neo-Kantian accounts of agency emphasize intentionality (the
power to formulate and enact aims) more than the moral will, but here
the question is whether other forces in the world approximate some
of the characteristics of intentional or purposive behavior on the part
of humans.” An acknowledgment of something like this, of a kind of
thing-power, may be at work in the “agency-versus-structure” debate
in the social sciences, according to which structures are described as
powerful entities that work with and against human purposes. But the
_ category of “structure” is ultimately unable to give the force of things
its due: a structure can act only negatively, as a constraint on human
agency, or passively, as an enabling background or context for it. Active
action or agency belongs to humans alone: “All agree that agency refers
to the intentional choices made by men and women as they take action
» to realize their goals,” even though “these actors are socially constituted
= beings embedded in sociocultural and ecological surroundings that
both define their goals and constrain their actions.”** Actors are “so-
cially constituted,” but the “constitutive” or productive power of struc-
tures derives from the human wills or intentions within them. There is
no agency proper to assemblages, only the effervescence of the agency
~ of individuals acting alone or in concert with each other. Structures,
surroundings, and contexts make a difference to outcomes, but they are
not quite vibrant matter.

The same point applies, I think, to the phenomenological theory of
agency set forth by Maurice Merleau-Ponty. His Phenomenology of Per-
_-ception was designed to avoid placing too much weight on human will,
intentionality, or reason. It focused instead on the embodied charac-


30 chapter 2 the agency of assemblages 31

ter of human action, through its concept of motor intentionality>+ and |-
on the agentic contributions made by an intersubjective field25 Diana
Coole, taking up Merleau-Ponty’s task, replaces the discrete agent and
its “residual individualism” with a “spectrum” of “agentic capacities”
housed sometimes in individual persons, sometimes in human physio

‘human ingenuity,” or “a simple white screen to support the differentia-
ion of society.”3*

‘The vital materialist must admit that different materialities, com-
posed of different sets of protobodies, will express different powers.
{umans, for example, can experience themselves as forming intentions
and as standing apart from their actions to reflect on the latter. But even
here it may be relevant to note the extent to which intentional reflex-
Avity is also a product of the interplay of human and nonhuman forces.
Jernard Stiegler does just this in his study of how tool-use engendered
being with an inside, with, that is, a psychological landscape of in-
teriority. Stiegler contends that conscious reflection in (proto)humans
first emerged with the use of stone tools because the materiality of the
tool acted as an external marker of a past need, as an “archive” of its
function. The stone tool (its texture, color, weight), in calling attention
its projected and recollected use, produced the first hollow of reflec-
ion.” Humanity and nonhumanity have always performed an intricate
dance with each other. There was never a time when human agency was
anything other than an interfolding network of humanity and nonhu-
manity; today this mingling has become harder to ignore.

logical processes or motor intentionality, and sometimes in human so-
cial structures or the “interworld”: “At one pole [of the spectrum of.
agentic capacities] I envisage pre-personal, non-cognitive bodily pro-
cesses; at the other, transpersonal, intersubjective processes that in-
stantiate an interworld. Between them are singularities: phenomena
with a relatively individual or collective identity.”

Coole’s attempt to dislodge agency from its exclusive mooring in the
individual, rational subject provides an important touchstone for my at-
tempt to extend the spectrum even further— beyond human bodies and
intersubjective fields to vital materialities and the human-nonhuman
assemblages they form. For though Coole’s spectrum gives no special _
privilege to the human individual, it recognizes only human powers:
human biological and neurological processes, human personalities,
human social practices and institutions. Coole limits the spectrum
in this way because she is interested in a specifically political kind of
agency, and for her politics is an exclusively human affair. Here I dis-
agree, and as I will argue in chapter 7, a case can be made for including .
nonhumans in the demos. The prevention of future blackouts, for ex-
ample, will depend on a host of cooperative efforts: Congress will have
to summon the courage to fight industry demands at odds with a more
common good, but reactive power will also have to do its part, on con-
dition that it is not asked to travel too far. A vital materialism attempts a ~
more radical displacement of the human subject than phenomenology -
has done, though Merleau-Ponty himself seemed to be moving in this
direction in his unfinished Visible and Unvisible.

That text begins to undo the conceit that humanity is the sole or ulti- _
mate wellspring of agency. So does Latour’s Aramis, which shows how |
the cars, electricity, and magnets of an experimental Parisian mass tran-
sit system acted positively (and not just as a constraint) alongside the
activities of human and intersubjective bodies, words, and regulations”
Latour’s later work continues to call for people to imagine other roles
for things besides that of carriers of necessity, or “plastic” vehicles for

- Efficacy, Trajectory, Causality

Theodor Adomo claimed that it was not possible to “unseal” or parse
concept into its constituent parts: one could only “circle” around a
mcept, perhaps until one gets dizzy or arrives at the point at which
nidentity with the real can no longer be ignored. What also happens
one circles around a concept is that a set of related terms comes

among others) efficacy, trajectory, and causality.

Efficacy points to the creativity of agency, to a capacity to make
mething new appear or occur. In the tradition that defines agency
as moral capacity, such new effects are understood as having arisen in
e wake of an advance plan or an intention, for agency “involves not
mere motion, but willed or intended motion, where motion can only
be willed or intended by a subject.”* A theory of distributive agency, in
contrast, does not posit a subject as the root cause of an effect. There

ito view, as a swarm of affiliates. In the case of agency, these include


32 chapter 2

are instead always a swarm of vitalities at play. The task becomes to
identify the contours of the swarm and the kind of relations that obtain
between its bits. To figure the generative source of effects as a swarm
is to see human intentions as always in competition and confederation
with many other strivings, for an intention is like a pebble thrown into
a pond, or an electrical current sent through a wire or neural network:
it vibrates and merges with other currents, to affect and be affected.
This understanding of agency does not deny the existence of that thrust
called intentionality, but it does see it as less definitive of outcomes. It
loosens the connections between efficacy and the moral subject, bring-
ing efficacy closer to the idea of the power to make a difference that calls
for response. And this power, I contend along with Spinoza and others,
is a power possessed by nonhuman bodies too.

In addition to being tied to the idea of efficacy, agency is also bound
up with the idea of a trajectory, a directionality or movement away

from somewhere even if the toward-which it moves is obscure or even
absent. Moral philosophy has figured this trajection as a purposiveness
or a goal-directedness linked to a (human or divine) mind capable of
choice and intention, but Jacques Derrida offers an alternative to this
consciousness-centered thinking by figuring trajectory as “messianicity.”
Messianicity is the open-ended promissory quality of a claim, image, or
entity. This unspecified promise is for Derrida the very condition of pos-
sibility of phenomenality: things in the world appear to us at all only
because they tantalize and hold us in suspense, alluding to a fullness
that is elsewhere, to a future that, apparently, is on its way. For Derrida
this promissory note is never and can never be redeemed: the “straining
forward toward the event” never finds relief. To be alive is to be waiting
“for someone or something that, in order to happen . . . must exceed and
surprise every determinate anticipation.” In naming the unfulfillable
promise as the condition of the appearance of anything, Derrida pro-
vides a way for the vital materialist to affirm the existence of a certain
trajectory or drive to assemblages without insinuating intentionality or
purposiveness.

A third element in the agentic swarm is perhaps the most vague of
all: causality. If agency is distributive or confederate, then instances of
efficient causality, with its chain of simple bodies acting as the sole im-
petus for the next effect, will be impossibly rare. Is George W. Bush the
efficient cause of the American invasion of Iraq? Is Osama bin Laden?

the agency of assemblages 33

If one extends the time frame of the action beyond that of even an in-
- stant, billiard-ball causality falters. Alongside and inside singular human
agents there exists a heterogenous series of actants with partial, over-
lapping, and conflicting degrees of power and effectivity.

Here causality is more emergent than efficient, more fractal than lin-
ear. Instead of an effect obedient to a determinant, one finds circuits in
which effect and cause alternate position and redound on each other.
If efficient causality seeks to rank the actants involved, treating some
as external causes and others as dependent effects, emergent causality
places the focus on the process as itself an actant, as itself in possession
of degrees of agentic capacity. According to Connolly,

: emergent causality is causal . . . in that a movement at [one] .. . level has
effects at another level. But it is emergent in that, first, the character of
the . . . activity is not knowable in. . . detail prior to effects that emerge at
the second level. [Moreover,] . . . the new effects become infused into the
very. . . organization of the second level . .. such . . . that the cause cannot
be said to be fully different from the effect engendered. ... [Third,]...a
series of . . . feedback loops operate between first and second levels to gen-
erate the stabilized result. The new emergent is shaped not only by external
forces that become infused into it but also by its own previously under-tapped
capacities for reception and self-organization.

This sense of a melting of cause and effect is also expressed in the ordi-
- Dary usage of the term agent, which can refer both to a human subject
who is the sole and original author of an effect (as in “moral agent”) and
also to someone or something that is the mere vehicle or passive conduit
* for the will of another (as in “literary agent” or “insurance agent”).

If ordinary language intuits the existence of a nonlinear, novhierar-
 chical, non-subject-centered mode of agency, Hannah’ Arendt makes
the point explicitly by distinguishing between “cause” and “origin”
in her discussion of totalitarianism. A cause is a singular, stable, and
masterful initiator of effects, while an origin is a complex, mobile, and
‘heteronomous enjoiner of forces: “The elements of totalitarianism form
its origins if by origins we do not understand ‘causes: Causality, ie.,
the factor of determination of a process of events in which always one
~ event causes and can be explained by another, is probably an altogether
“alien and falsifying category in the realm of the historical and political
sciences. Elements by themselves probably never cause anything. They


34 chapter 2

become origins of events if and when they crystallize into fixed and
definite forms. Then, and only then, can we trace their history back-
wards. The event illuminates its own past, but it can never be deduced
from it.”#

For Arendt, it is impossible to discern in advance the cause of totali-
tarianism. Instead, like all political phenomena, its sources can only be
revealed retroactively. These sources are necessarily multiple, made up
of elements unaffiliated before the “crystallization” process began. In
fact, what makes the event happen is precisely the contingent coming
together of a set of elements. Here Arendt’s view is consonant with a dis-
tributive notion of agency. But if we look at what spurs such crystalliza-
tions for her, we see her revert to a more traditional, subject-centered
notion. Whereas the theorist of distributive agency would answer that
anything could touch off the crystallization process (a sound, a last
straw, a shoe, a blackout, a human intention), Arendt concludes that
while the “significance” of an event can exceed “the intentions which
eventually cause the crystallization, intentions are nevertheless the key
to the event. Once again, human intentionality is positioned as the most
important of all agential factors, the bearer of an exceptional kind of
power.®

Shi

Why speak of the agency of assemblages, and not, more modestly, of
their capacity to form a “culture,” or to “self-organize,” or to “partici-
pate” in effects? Because the rubric of material agency is likely to be a
stronger counter to human exceptionalism, to, that is, the human ten-
dency to understate the degree to which people, animals, artifacts, tech-
nologies, and elemental forces share powers and operate in dissonant
conjunction with each other. No one really knows what human agency
is, or what humans are doing when they are said to perform as agents. In
the face of every analysis, human agency remains something of a mys-
tery. If we do not know just how it is that human agency operates, how
can we be so sure that the processes through which nonhumans make
their mark are qualitatively different?

An assemblage owes its agentic capacity to the vitality of the mate-
‘ialities that constitute it. Something like this congregational agency

the agency of assemblages : 35.0

is called shi in the Chinese tradition. Shi helps to “illuminate some-
thing that is usually difficult to capture in discourse: namely, the kind
of potential that originates not in human initiative but instead results
from the very disposition of things.“ Shi is the style, energy, propensity,
trajectory, or élan inherent to a specific arrangement of things. Origi-
nally a word used in military strategy, shi emerged in the description ofa
good general who must be able to read and then ride the shi ofa configu-
ration of moods, winds, historical trends, and armaments: shi names the
dynamic force emanating from a spatio-temporal configuration rather
than from any particular element within it.

Again, the shi of an assemblage is vibratory; it is the mood or style
of an open whole in which both the membership changes over time
and the members themselves undergo internal alteration. Each mem-
ber “possesses autonomous emergent properties which are thus capable
of independent variation and therefore of being out of phase with one
another in time”*” When a member-actant, in the midst of a process
of self-alteration, becomes out of sync with its (previous) self, when,
if you like, it is in a reactive-power state,** it can form new sets of re-
lations in the assemblage and be drawn toward a different set of allies.
The members of an open whole never melt into a collective body, but
instead maintain an energy potentially at odds with the shi. Deleuze
invented the notion of “adsorbsion” to describe this kind of part-whole
relationship: adsorbsion is a gathering of elements in a way that both
forms. coalition and yet preserves something of the agential impetus of
each element.** It is because of the creative activity within actants that
the agency of assemblages is not best described in terms of social struc-
tures, a locution that designates a stolid whole whose efficacy resides
only in its conditioning recalcitrance or capacity to obstruct.

The shi of a milieu can be obvious or subtle. It can operate at the very

' threshold of human perception or more violently. A coffee house or a

school house is a mobile configuration of people, insects, odors, ink,
electrical flows, air currents, caffeine, tables, chairs, fluids, and sounds.
Their shi might at one time consist in the mild and ephemeral effluence
of good vibes, and at another in a more dramatic force capable of en-
gendering a philosophical or political movement, as it did in the cafés
of Jean-Paul Sartre’s and Simone de Beauvoir'’s Paris and in the Islamist
schools in Pakistan in the late twentieth century.


” of unpredictability marking assemblages composed of intersecting and

36 chapter 2 the agency of assemblages’ 37,

the order of material nature. To affirm a vitality distributed along a con-
tinuum of ontological types and to identify the human-nonhuman as-
semblage as a locus of agency is to unsettle this belief. But must a dis-
ibutive, composite notion of agency thereby abandon the attempt to
old individuals responsible for their actions or hold officials account-
le to the public? The directors of the FirstEnergy corporation were
all too eager to reach this conclusion in the task force report: no one
‘teally is to blame. Though it is unlikely that the energy traders shared
amy vital materialism, I, too, find it hard to assign the strongest or most
unitive version of moral responsibility to them. Autonomy and strong
responsibility seem to me to be empirically false, and thus their invoca-
ion seems tinged with injustice. In emphasizing the ensemble nature of
action and the interconnections between persons and things, a theory
f vibrant matter presents individuals as simply incapable of bearing full
onsibility for their effects.
e notion of a confederate agency does attenuate the blame game,
but it does not thereby abandon the project of identifying (what Arendt
called) the sources of harmful effects. To the contrary, such a notion
broadens the range of places to look for sources. Look to long-term

Political Responsibility and the Agency of Assemblages

The electrical grid, by blacking out, lit up quite a lot: the shabby con-
dition of the public-utilities infrastructure, the law-abidingness of New
York City residents living in the dark, the disproportionate and accel-
erating consumption of energy by North Americans, and the element

resonating elements. Thus spoke the grid. One might even say that it
exhibited a communicative interest. It will be objected that such com-
munication is possible only through the intermediary of humans. But is
this really an objection, given that even linguistic communication nec-
essarily entails intermediaries? My speech, for example, depends on the
graphite in my pencil, millions of persons, dead and alive, in my Indo-
European language group, not to mention the electricity in my brain
and my laptop. (The human brain, properly wired, can light up a fifteen-
watt bulb.) Humans and nonhumans alike depend on a “fabulously com-
plex” set of speech prostheses.°°
Noortje Marres rightly notes that “it is often hard to grasp just what
the sources of agency are that make a particular event happen” and that
this “ungraspability may be an [essential] aspect of agency.” But it is a
safe bet to begin with the presumption that the locus of political respon-
sibility is a human-nonhuman assemblage. On close-enough inspection,
the productive power that has engendered an effect will turn out to bea
confederacy, and the human actants within it will themselves turn out
to be confederations of tools, microbes, minerals, sounds, and other
“foreign” materialities. Human intentionality can emerge as agentic
only by way of such a distribution. The agency of assemblages is not the
strong, autonomous kind of agency to which Augustine and Kant (or an
omnipotent God) aspired; this is because the relationship between ten-
dencies and outcomes or between trajectories and effects is imagined

strings of events: to selfish intentions, to energy policy offering lucra-
tive opportunities for energy trading while generating a tragedy of the
‘ mmons, and to a psychic resistance to acknowledging a link between
American energy use, American imperialism, and anti-Americanism;
ut look also to the stubborn directionality of a high-consumption so-
infrastructure, to unstable electron flows, to conative wildfires, to
exurban housing pressures, and to the assemblages they form. In each
on the list, humans and their intentions participate, but they are
the sole or always the most profound actant in the assemblage.
ough it would give me pleasure to assert that deregulation and
orate greed are the real culprits in the blackout, the most I can
estly affirm is that corporations are one of the sites at which human
at reform can be applied, that corporate regulation is one place
re intentions might initiate a cascade of effects. Perhaps the ethical
onsibility of an individual human now resides in one’s response to
assemblages in which one finds oneself participating: Do I attempt
xtricate myself from assemblages whose trajectory is likely to do
? Do I enter into the proximity of assemblages whose conglom-

as more porous, tenuous, and thus indirect.

Coole’s account of a spectrum of agentic capacities, like the kind of
agency that is subjected to structural constraints, does not recognize
the agency of human-nonhuman assemblages. And this is in part be-
cause of the difficulty of theorizing agency apart from the belief that
bumans are special in the sense of existing, at least in part, outside of


erate effectivity tends toward the enactment of nobler ends? Agency
is, I believe, distributed across a mosaic, but it is also possible to say
something about the kind of striving that may be exercised by a human
within the assemblage. This exertion is perhaps best understood on the
model of riding a bicycle on a gravel road. One can throw one’s weight
this way or that, inflect the bike in one direction or toward one trajec.
tory of motion. But the rider is but one actant operative in the moving
whole.

Tn a world of distributed agency, a hesitant attitude toward assigning
singular blame becomes a presumptive virtue. Of course, sometimes
moral outrage, akin to what Plato called thumos, is indispensable to
democratic;and just politics. In the years leading up to the publicatio
of this book, these were some of the things that called me to outrage:
the doctrine of preemptive war, the violation of human rights and of the
Geneva Accords at Guanténamo Bay, the torture of prisoners in Iraq and
in accordance with a policy of so-called extraordinary rendition, the re-
striction of protesters at President Bush’s public appearances to a “free
speech zone” out of the view of television cameras, the U.S. military’
policy of not keeping a count of Iraqi civilian deaths. Outrage will not
and should not disappear, but a politics devoted too exclusively to moral
condemnation and not enough to a cultivated discernment of the web
of agentic capacities can do little good. A moralized politics of good
and evil, of singular agents who must be made to pay for their sins (be
they bin Laden, Saddam Hussein, or Bush) becomes unethical to th
degree that it legitimates vengeance and elevates violence to the tool of
first resort. An understanding of agency as distributive and confederate
thus reinvokes the need to detach ethics from moralism and to produce
guides to action appropriate to a world of vital, crosscutting forces.

These claims are contestable, and other actants, enmeshed in other
assemblages, will offer different diagnoses of the political and its prob-
lems. It is ultimately a matter of political judgment what is more needed
today: should we acknowledge the distributive quality of agency to ad-
dress the power of human-nonhuman assemblages and to resist a poli
tics of blame? Or should we persist with a strategic understatement o}

material agency in the hopes of enhancing the accountability of specifi
humans?

dible Matter

is not controversial to say that trash, gadgets, electricity, and fire are
levant to politics, or to say that though such things do not qualify as
litical stakeholders, they form the milieu of human action or serve
“means or impediments to it. But do the categories of context, tool,
and constraint capture the full range of powers possessed by nonhuman.
bodies? In this chapter I will focus on one subset of those bodies, the
id that you can eat. I will treat food as conative bodies vying along-
le and within an other complex body (a person’s “own” body). To the
les of context, tool, and constraint (or background, resource, and
limit) I will add the role of actant. Food will appear as actant inside and
longside intention-forming, morality-(dis)obeying, language-using,
lexivity-wielding, and culture-making human beings, and as an
inducer-producer of salient, public effects. We can call the assemblage
med by these human and nonhuman bodies “American consump-
tion” and name as one of its effects the “crisis of obesity.”

My case for food as a participant in this assemblage has two prongs.
e first seeks support in scientific studies of the effects of dietary


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=csac20
Science as Culture
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/csac20
The Big Techification of Everything
Reijer Hendrikse, Ilke Adriaans, Tobias J. Klinge & Rodrigo Fernandez
To cite this article:  Reijer Hendrikse, Ilke Adriaans, Tobias J. Klinge & Rodrigo Fernandez
(2022) The Big Techification of Everything, Science as Culture, 31:1, 59-71, DOI:
10.1080/09505431.2021.1984423
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2021.1984423
Published online: 13 Oct 2021.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2571
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 12 View citing articles 

The Big Techi ﬁcation of Everything
Reijer Hendriksea, Ilke Adriaansb, Tobias J. Klingecand Rodrigo Fernandezb,d
aVrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium;bCentre for Research on Multinational Corporations
(SOMO), Amsterdam, The Netherlands;cKU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium;dTrinity College Dublin, Dublin,
Ireland
KEYWORDS Big Tech; capitalism; digital platforms; information and communication technology; science and
technology studies; socio-technical systems
Introduction
A few months into the pandemic, Naomi Klein (2020 ) noted how a tech-driven
‘Pandemic Shock Doctrine ’was shaping up under conditions of lockdown and
social distancing. In the US, Microsoft founder Bill Gates and former Google
executive Eric Schmidt were invited by New York governor Andrew Cuomoto discuss the digitization of state functions in order to tackle the coronacrisis. In the UK, Big Tech companies were invited to Downing Street to
discuss the solutions required to overcome Covid-19 (Volpicelli 2020 ), seeing
the surveillance giant Palantir earn lucrative contracts to streamline data
ﬂows across the state. Meanwhile, ministers from France and Germany
lauded the launch of cloud computing strategy Gaia-X, which was designedto enhance ‘digital sovereignty’ across the European Union, but which in
reality gave front row seats to the usual American Big Techs (Fermigier andFranck 2020 ).
Today a handful of Big Tech platforms form ‘the infrastructural core ’of
increasingly digitized economies and societies (Van Dijck et al. 2018 : 12), oper-
ating as obligatory passage points for social exchange –colonizing professional
and private lives, monopolizing ﬂows of information and communication. In
the latter case, the platforms that abetted the rise of the far right in the U.S.in 2016 joined forces to banish Donald Trump from the digitized publicsphere after inciting violence in Washington DC in 2020. While there are legit-imate arguments for Big Techs to counter imminent political violence, theseactions illustrate the mounting unchecked power these companies wield oversocial life.
Although there are exceptions (e.g. Birch and Muniesa 2020 ; Birch and
Cochrane 2021 ), the ﬁeld of science and technology studies (STS) exhibits
some lacunae in engaging with Big Tech as the core lubricant of contemporarycapitalism, which we seek to remedy. This paper builds o ﬀof a recent report
© 2021 Process PressCONTACT Reijer Hendrikse reijer.hendrikse@vub.be Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels 1050, BelgiumSCIENCE AS CULTURE
2022, VOL. 31, NO. 1, 59 –71
https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2021.1984423
(Fernandez et al. 2020 ), wherein we investigated the ﬁnancial accounts of the
world ’s seven largest digital technology companies, and analyzed how their
respective monopoly positions are augmented and exploited through their
ﬁnancial operations, i.e. corporate ﬁnancialization.1Furthermore, we tried to
historicize, conceptualize and theorize the popular notion ‘Big Tech ’, which fea-
tures more prominently in consultancy and journalistic circles rather than inacademia.
In this contribution, we analyze the past, present and future of Big Tech, and
frame its ascendancy as a socio-technical transition, with a handful of Big Techcompanies progressively becoming the infrastructural core of a new socio-tech-nical system anchored in digital technologies, progressively reshaping economyand society (Geels 2002 ,2004 ; Fuenfschilling and Tru ﬀer2016 ). In sketching
the macro contours of this transition-cum -system, we seek to contribute
towards a more academic understanding of Big Tech. Illuminating how techno-logical change impacts the material artefacts structuring social life, graduallygiving rise to path-dependent processes of institutional change, studies onsocio-technical transitions and systems build on insights from STS, and herewe seek to illuminate how Big Tech has ‘disrupted ’and transformed various
dimensions/material aspects undergirding social life –not only including
science and technology, but also economics, politics and culture (e.g. Araujoand Harrison 2002 ; David 1994 ; Freeman and Louça 2001 ).
The remainder of this contribution ﬁrst expands on our notion ‘the Big Tech
bang’, through which we analyze the historical rise of Big Tech and its role in
shaping an emerging socio-technical system. Second, we move to the presentand expand on the features of what we call ‘the Big Tech model ’, which is
based on generating network e ﬀects to facilitate rent extraction, and through
which we understand the mounting power of Big Tech. As argued by Birchand Cochrane, STS and related ﬁelds emphasize ‘the construction of economic
rents –how they are made –rather than treating rents as the distortion of a nat-
uralized competitive market ’(2021 : 2-3). Third, ceteris paribus , we anticipate
the future by elaborating on what we call ‘the Big Techi ﬁcation of everything ’,
a scenario whereby Big Tech not only comes to rewire economy and society, butalso enmeshes itself evermore closely with the state, e ﬀectively becoming the
sun in the new socio-technical solar system.
Past: The Big Tech Bang
The history of modern capitalism is often narrated through cycles or waves,
which are characterized by investment booms in a set of new technologicalinnovations (see Rostow 1975 for an overview), giving rise to novel socio-tech-
nical transitions and systems. The late nineteenth century, for example, sawmassive investments in US railroads and the rise of monopolies in banking,oil and steel (Lamoreaux 2019 ). This development saw the so-called ‘Robber60 R. HENDRIKSE ET AL.
Barons ’–including John P. Morgan, John D. Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie
–accumulate unprecedented wealth in what has become known as ‘the Gilded
Age’(Wu 2018 ). In contrast, the late twentieth century gave birth to another set
of innovations, this time clustered around an emerging information and com-
munication technology (ICT) industry. These developments progressivelyignited a new wave of monopoly capitalism, giving rise to twenty- ﬁrst-
century ‘Big Tech Barons ’such as Bill Gates and Je ﬀBezos. The ﬁnancial
ﬁrepower of the captains of what might called ‘the New Gilded Age ’increas-
ingly rivals that of their nineteenth-century predecessors.
Inspired by the work of Carlota Perez (2010 ),Figure 1 seeks to encapsulate
the dawn and evolution of the ICT wave, qualifying our focus on seven key BigTech companies (Fernandez et al. 2020 : 8). We subdivide this ICT wave into
stylized periods of tech di ﬀusion: the ﬁrst is the installation period , heralding
the ICT-driven socio-technical transition, with hard- and software develop-ments within the tech sector, followed by a deployment period based on the
data-driven ‘platformization ’of capitalism (Langley anf Leyshon 2017 ;
Plantin et al. 2018 ) beyond the tech sector –seeing the socio-technical tran-
sition become a system on its own, by rede ﬁning how people and technology
interact, and thereby transforming the operating logics undergirdingeconomy and society.
Big Tech ’s installation period is subdivided in three phases. First, the 1970s
are characterized by hardware developments, led by IBM as the dominant
company, and with the 1971 invention of Intel ’s microprocessor foreshadowing
the advent of personal computers (PCs) replacing IBM ’s expensive business
machines. Two of our seven Big Tech companies were established during
Figure 1. The Big Tech Bang (source: Fernandez et al. 2020 : 13).2SCIENCE AS CULTURE 61
this era (Apple, Microsoft). Second, during the 1980s going into the 1990s, the
orientation in ICT development shifted towards software interoperability, with
Microsoft taking over from IBM as the dominant company. Third, the 1990srollout of the internet heralded the age of digital platforms ,g i v i n gr i s et ot h e
other ﬁve Big Tech companies (Alibaba, Alphabet/Google, Amazon, Facebook,
Tencent), constituting a ‘Big Tech Bang ’, whilst the more mature tech giants
Apple and Microsoft steadily reinvented themselves as digital platforms.
With the installation of our seven Big Tech companies completed around the
new millennium, political and economic developments like the dotcom crashand 9/11 brought forth the age of ‘surveillance capitalism ’(Zubo ﬀ2019 ), ignit-
ing Big Tech ’s subsequent deployment period, expanding its reach throughout
economy and society. Amongst others, Apple ’s iPhone massively expanded the
scale and scope for data extraction, as PCs e ﬀectively morphed into mobile
smartphones, boosting global connectivity and allowing for the developmentof personalized applications, with mounting volumes of data stored intoexpanding cloud infrastructures. As Big Tech turned into ‘the infrastructural
core’(Van Dijck et al. 2018 : 12) it is today, myriad digital platforms o ﬀering
consumer services developed around it (Blanke and Pybus 2020 ), such as
Airbnb, Net ﬂix, Spotify and Uber, igniting novel cultures under the rampant
rollout of a new socio-technical system, whilst other sectors rapidly embracedthe promises of digitization, including the world of haute ﬁnance (Hendrikse
et al. 2018 ).
The rise of Big Tech cannot be understood without examining the wider
macro-economic and monetary context. In response to the ﬁnancial crisis of
2008, for example, central banks embarked on a massive expansion of theirbalance sheets. By purchasing ﬁnancial assets such as government bonds with
newly created money, however, they drove up prices and hence put pressureon asset yields elsewhere. As a result, shares in Big Tech companies became asafe haven for investors. This trend was strengthened with the corona pandemicin 2020, driving market valuations to unprecedented highs. Furthermore, thesecompanies could make use of the ﬁnancial environment by accumulating stocks
ofﬁnancial assets in response to pro ﬁts outgrowing productive investments,
seeing the ﬁnancial assets of the seven Big Tech companies ’approach US
$700 billion in 2020. Moreover, monetary policies also fueled an increase incorporate debt. Somewhat counter-intuitively, it was not struggling companiesavailing themselves of this exceptional degree of liquidity. Instead, it was theworld ’s most-proﬁ table and best-capitalized Big Tech companies, who then
leveraged their valuations by taking on more debt. As a result, their totaldebt increased from virtually nothing in 2010 to almost US$320 billion in2020. As will be discussed in more detail below, by ﬂexing their unrivaled
ﬁnancial muscle, Big Techs have massively expanded their operations and
kept competitors at bay.62 R. HENDRIKSE ET AL.
Geopolitically, another de ﬁning phenomenon shaping the global rise of the
digital socio-technical system is the emergence of Chinese Big Tech companies.
This has been spearheaded by Alibaba and Tencent, followed by the likes ofHuawei and Baidu, which have combined technological expansion with rapidsocietal deployment under strict state control (Gruin 2019 ). Having been nur-
tured by US investors (Jia 2018 ), these Chinese companies are increasingly chal-
lenging Silicon Valley in domains like arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) and ﬁnancial
technology (FinTech), resulting in mounting political and economic strifeacross the globe (Sharma 2020 ; Tanda and Schena 2019 ; Webb 2019 ). In all,
these developments have propelled Big Tech ’s power as we know it today. In
the next section we outline and expand upon these joint features in what wecall‘the Big Tech model ’.
Present: The Big Tech Model
While the individual business activities of the world ’s major Big Tech compa-
nies di ﬀer extensively –whether digitizing professional working environ-
ments (Microsoft) or retail and consumption (Alibaba, Amazon), to
colonizing ﬂows of information (Google) and communication (Facebook,
Tencent) –we outline a broad generic framework relevant to them all. In
essence, our ‘Big Tech model ’can be seen as a two-step process of (i)
scaling up into a monopoly position, followed by (ii) mounting rent extrac-
tion escaping market pressures.
According to Srnicek (2016 ), digital platforms share four characteristics.
First, they function as intermediary infrastructures that bring di ﬀerent user
groups together –whether as users/buyers and developers/sellers in the
Apple App Store, or as private individuals who build their own content on
social media like Facebook. Second, platforms thrive on network e ﬀects,
whereby the larger the platform ’s size or user base becomes, the more data,
rent, and/or value can be extracted. Third, this is why platforms aim to maxi-
mize user engagement for the purpose of collecting data, meaning that platforms
are designed to get ‘users’ hooked. Fourth and ﬁnally, Big Tech platforms make
use of intra ﬁrmcross-subsidization to expand their reach and user base. This is
why the likes of Facebook and Tencent o ﬀer their services for ‘free’, while
Alibaba and Amazon (and their ﬁnanciers) have habitually accepted ﬁnancial
losses to increase market share, and hence network e ﬀects. Indeed, an appetite
for sustained loss-making to gain market share is a de ﬁning
 characteristic of
(aspiring) digital platforms, with the world ’s largest technology-focused
venture capital fund –Softbank ’s Vision Fund –playing an important role
(Boyka 2020 ). In contrast to short-term shareholder value orientations of the
ﬁnancialized company of the 1990s, today ’s phenomenon is what Rahman
and Thelen ( 2019 ) see as the new ‘patient capital ’–one willing to ‘lose’
money in the short- and medium-term to maximize shareholder value overSCIENCE AS CULTURE 63
the long haul. Put di ﬀerently, the new patient capital anticipates and accelerates
the socio-technical transition, expecting returns when scale is reached and the
platform assumes a leading role within the new socio-technical system. AsBirch and Cochrane (2021 : 2) note:
Big Tech ecosystems are important techno-economic sites of new and emerging forms
of digital rentiership …reﬂecting debates in STS and cognate ﬁelds about the impor-
tance of unpacking economic rents as a form of social practice
In their own ways, the world ’s Big Techs have progressively come to control
and operate a series of di ﬀerent monopolies. Although quantifying and qualify-
ing monopoly power remains contested (UNCTAD 2018 ), at a general level
monopoly power exists when a single corporation (or a handful of collaborating
corporations) wields wide-ranging inﬂ uence in speci ﬁc economic domains.
Such in ﬂuence allows monopolies to extract signiﬁ cant rents, which Christo-
phers ( 2019 :2 )d e ﬁnes as ‘income derived from the ownership, possession or
control of scarce assets and under conditions of limited or no competition ’.
Google and Facebook typically extract rents through advertising, whereasother Big Tech companies charge sellers for conducting operations on theirplatforms, whether Amazon or Alibaba through sales commissions, or Appleor Tencent charging fees from developers for selling apps via their platforms
(see Birch and Cochrane 2021 for a classi ﬁcation of Big Tech rents).
Overall, tech monopolies are about control rather than ownership, for
example by becoming the foundational infrastructure within a particular
sector or service, through which prices and terms can be set, markets shaped,and a company’ s own products or services can be promoted (Dolata 2019 ;
Rahman and Thelen 2019 ). In a self-reinforcing feedback loop, digital rent
extraction is augmented by capitalizing upon ‘gatekeeper power, leveraging
power, and information exploitation power ’(Khan 2018 : 331). As Rahman
and Thelen (2019 : 4) argue:
[T]his ‘winner take all ’market dominance o ﬀers many avenues for generating returns
through rents while also multiplying the number of stakeholders whose dependence
on the platform makes them potential allies in e ﬀorts to defend it against unwelcome
regulation. This networked dominance is what makes platform ﬁrms both a revival
and a reinvention of classical monopoly concerns
What sounds rather abstract has been unearthed in a number of investigations.
In 2020, the US Congressional Investigation of Competition in Digital Markets
detailed just how ‘highly concentrated and prone to monopolization ’the so-
called markets of the American Big Techs are (United States Senate Congres-
sional House Committee on the Judiciary 2020 : 11). By virtue of their
control over key platforms and wider ecosystems, they were found ‘to dictate
terms and extract concessions that no one would reasonably consent to in acompetitive market ’, and to consolidate their respective positions by ongoing64 R. HENDRIKSE ET AL.
acquisitions designed ‘to neutralize a competitive threat or to maintain and
expand the ﬁrm’s dominance ’(ibid.). Similar charges have recently been
leveled against Alibaba and Tencent by the Chinese government. Across the
globe, therefore, the Big Tech model ultimately boils down to overcomingand escaping competitive pressures by increasingly constructing andgoverning
‘proprietary markets ’(Staab 2019 ).
This rise of digital monopolies invites us to rethink the logics of capitalism.
On the one hand, ‘there is really something qualitatively distinct about the
forces of production that eat brains, that produce and instrumentalize andcontrol information ’(Wark 2019 : 42). Given these distinct features undergird-
ing the new socio-technical system, Zubo ﬀ(2019 ) goes as far as claiming that
Big Tech has given rise to ‘a new logic of accumulation ’known as surveillance
capitalism , geared toward data extraction and behavioral modi ﬁcation. On the
other hand, however, critics argue that despite these novelties, data-hungry BigTech companies merely augment pre-existing capitalist tendencies (Morozov2019 ). What is new in the digital age is not the tendency towards monopoly,
but rather the rampant ‘assetization ’of digital footprints, turning personal
data into datasets, which Big Techs exploit in order to re ﬁne their algorithms
and keep an edge over potential competitors (Rikap 2021 ), and sell their com-
mercial intelligence to third-party corporate clients (Beauvisage and Mellet2020 ).
To Peck and Phillips (2021 : 75), placing the socio-technical system captained
by Big Tech in the longue durée perspective of Fernand Braudel, ‘the real home
of platform capitalism is the zone of the antimarket, a murky but dominatinglayer located above the competition, where it operates as a new machine withan old purpose’ . For those orbiting around the infrastructural core of Big
Tech monopolies, the so-called ‘cost of exclusion ’(Feld 2019 ) for trying to
evade the reach of Big Tech rises dramatically, up to the point where it isnearly impossible to stay clear of it (Foroohar 2019 ). Through data gathering
and assetization, Big Tech not only accumulates rents but also ‘intellectual
monopoly power’ which ‘extends beyond the market and takes the form of capi-
talist planning of production and innovation ’(Rikap 2021 : 11). This gives rise
to a data-driven intellectual monopoly capitalism , accumulating ‘knowledge that
was produced as a commons, but that these corporations privately monetize ’
(ibid.). As Rikap further argues:
[I]ntellectual monopoly capitalism can be conceived as the stage in capitalism where
capital accumulation (and distribution) is led by a core of intellectual monopolies that
base their accumulation (and power) on their permanent and expanding monopoly(and assetization) of predated knowledge (ibid., p.10)
There are overlapping concepts to de ﬁne this changing nature of digitizing
capitalism. Birch (2020b : 3), for example, uses technoscienti ﬁc capitalism to
signify a ‘(re)con ﬁguration of a range of ‘things’ (e.g. infrastructure, data,SCIENCE AS CULTURE 65
knowledge, bodies) as assets or capitalized property ’–constituting a socio-
technical transition-cum -system which is progressively ‘underpinned by ren-
tiership or the appropriation of value through ownership and control rights ’
(see also Dolata 2018 ). Accordingly, Birch (2020a : 10) argues that ‘the entangle-
ment of digital technoscience and capitalism has led to an ‘automated neoliber-
alism’in which markets are conﬁ gured by digital platforms ’. Prior to the
coronavirus pandemic, further deepening social and societal reliance on Big
Tech, the political ramiﬁ cations of the new socio-technical system were
already becoming visible, as ‘the rollout of data-driven technologies increas-
ingly requires the rollback of liberal protections by design ’(Hendrikse 2021 :
84), arguably giving rise to what might be called an automated neo-illiberalism .
Future: The Big Techiﬁ cation of Everything
The world ’s largest technology companies …have spent at least $264bn buying up
potential rivals worth less than $1bn since the start of 2021 —double the previous
record registered in 2000 during the dotcom boom (Stacey et al. 2021 )
Without meaningful political interventions, the Big Tech companies formingthe infrastructural core of today ’s digital socio-technical system are set to
captain what we have called ‘the Big Techi ﬁcation of everything ’over the
course of the 2020s (Fernandez et al. 2020 : 14), shaped by advances in the
ﬁelds of AI, the ﬁfth generation of mobile communication (5G), and the so-
called ‘Internet of Things ’(IoT) –connecting and operating all kinds of appli-
cations and devices in the digital economy (Green ﬁeld2017 ). Given the self-
reinforcing market-conquering logics of the Big Tech model, the world ’s
leading Big Techs will dominate the tech universe for the time being, with thou-sands of platforms orbiting around them, and millions of applications built ontop of them –all relying on its core infrastructure and paying rents for doing so.
With each company having cornered its own monopoly whilst trying to
expand further in scale and scope, Big Tech has come to colonize all kinds ofsocio-technical forms, if not the means of social exchange broadly de ﬁned,
overlaying the ways in which people used to interact via digital interfaces.Big Techs may come to inﬁ ltrate communication (Facebook, Tencent) and
information (Alphabet); work (Microsoft) and consumption (Alibaba,Amazon). In setting the standards for software toolkits (Google ’s Android,
Apple’ s iOS) and programs (Microsoft ’sOﬃce 365), and spearheading the
development of the hardware to enable exchange (Apple ’s iPhone), Big Tech
has become the ‘obligatory passage point ’for all types of exchange in the
digital economy (Bassens and Van Meeteren 2015 ). Big Tech is at the center
of a new socio-technical system, functioning as its core operating system, sub-
jecting the rest of the world to its intrusive control drift and rent-seeking logics.
Amongst others, with the new socio-technical system anchoring the platfor-
mization of capitalism, we anticipate that scholars will increasingly direct their66 R. HENDRIKSE ET AL.
attention to what might be labelled the platform state . Braun ( 2020 ) has studied
how central banks exert power through ﬁnancial markets, creating various
interdependencies between public and private domains and interests. In
similar fashion, the socio-technical system ’s infrastructural core is continuously
reﬁned through data extraction and analysis, accumulating more rent and
power in a self-reinforcing feedback loop (Santesteban and Longpre 2020 ), aug-
menting the tech dependencies of states. The coronavirus pandemic has seengovernments worldwide come to rely on the services of Big Tech, whilstDonald Trump ’s social media ban underscores the extent to which Big Tech
eﬀectively polices the digitized public sphere. That said, notwithstanding
actual Palantir-powered policing in the US, we arguably need to redirect ourgaze towards Beijing to fully grasp how Big Tech ’s infrastructural power
becomes interdigitated with political control, revealing the totalitarian capabili-ties of the digital socio-technical system (Hendrikse 2021 ). This brings us to the
geopolitical angle of Big Tech and the geo-economic, military and technologicalrivalry between the US and China, which promises to sharpen over the decadeto come.
The disruptive potential of Big Tech is also visible in existing multilateral and
bilateral treaties on trade and investment. Amongst others, the ways in whichplatforms monetize their digital operations are not compatible with the principlesthat were created to regulate corporations in the analogue or ‘real’world. For
example, Big Tech is at odds with the existing cross-border allocation of taxrights, seeing Big Tech companies making extensive use of o ﬀshore ﬁnancial
centers (Fernandez and Hendrikse 2020 ). How to tax Big Tech remains subject
ofﬁerce diplomatic contestation, although the recent G7 agreement on a
global minimum tax for multinationals o ﬀers a glimpse of what might be under-
way. The speed at which the new socio-technical system has developed into afocal point on the stock market, in political communication, in geopolitics anddaily life sharply contrasts with the much slower pace at which political insti-tutions and civil society have been able to grasp the transformative nature ofthese companies. Big Tech ’s opacity has so far provided it with an advantage
and left regulators to play catch-up. However, on both sides of the Atlantic,not to mention China, we are now seeing signs of change.
Lawmakers are seeking to rein in the mounting power of Big Tech before the
socio-technical system absorbs the authority of (democratically-elected) gov-ernments. Again, these developments are reminiscent of earlier transformativeepochs, not least the second half of the nineteenth century. Back then, newmeans of transportation and communication came to remodel the socio-tech-nical system of yesteryear, in gales of ‘creative destruction ’, resulting in exces-
sive wealth and power in the hands of the so-called Robber Barons. Then, asnow, existing regulations failed to counteract this new tech-driven regime cen-tered on monopolies, sparking a popular backlash bringing the Gilded Age toan end. As such, the past also suggests how to approach the Big Tech BaronsSCIENCE AS CULTURE 67
of today ’s New Gilded Age, which at minimum requires a serious update of the
outdated competition and tax policies to rein in Big Tech.
Our societies urgently need to re ﬂect on the possible ways in which we can
rein in the looming ‘Big Techi ﬁcation of everything ’, going beyond free-market
imperatives to break up the Big Tech monopolies, or simply break open their
data treasure chests. We need to contemplate the ways in which consumersor users might reclaim ownership over data as citizens, ideally short-circuitingthe core operating logics of surveillance capitalism: one way might be toembrace open source solutions to circumvent Big Tech enclosure; anotherway is to take the infrastructural core of Big Tech into public hands altogether,recognizing them for the crucial public utilities they are. In any case, weurgently need to come to terms with the ways which Big Tech has come to
captain the socio-technical system of our age, and consider rewriting its
codes to appropriate its spoils for more meaningful ends.
Conclusion
This contribution has sought to trace and qualify the rise –past, present and
future –of Big Tech, framed and understood as a socio-technical transform-
ation- cum-system. First, we sketched the beginnings of the socio-technical tran-
sition, culminating in ‘the Big Tech Bang ’at the turn of the millennium, giving
birth to what today are the world ’s leading tech companies. Next, we sketched the
contours of ‘the Big Tech Model ’undergirding the new socio-technical system,
based on generating network e ﬀects to facilitate rent extraction, whose logics
have since spread throughout economy and society, transforming pre-existing
industries, products and services, as well as their underlying socio-technical prac-tices and structures. Without meaningful change, we subsequently argued thatthe intrusive control drift and rent-seeking logics driving the new socio-technicalsystem will lead to ‘the Big Techi ﬁcation of everything ’, invoking dystopian pro-
spects, and re ﬂected on possible avenues to halt this development.
Notes
1. We selected the world ’s leading Big Techs on the basis of their market capitalization in
December 2020, resulting in seven leading Big Tech companies, ﬁve of which are
headquartered in the US, Alphabet (Google), Apple, Amazon, Facebook and Micro-
soft, and two in China, Alibaba and Tencent (Fernandez et al. 2020 : 8).
2. We are indebted to Michiel van Meeteren, who sketched the original contours of this
ﬁgure.
Acknowledgements
This research was made possible with ﬁnancial assistance from the Research Foundation
Flanders (FWO), grant numbers G079718N and G004920N, and the European ResearchCouncil, grant number 683197.68 R. HENDRIKSE ET AL.
Disclosure Statement
No potential conﬂ ict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Notes on contributors
Reijer Hendrikse is a postdoctoral researcher at the Vrije Universiteit Brussels, Belgium. He
currently works on a project investigating the growing footprint of tech companies in the
ﬁnancial centers of the Benelux.
Ilke Adriaans is a researcher at the Centre for Research on Multinational Corporations
(SOMO), Amsterdam. Her research focuses on the impact of technological innovations in
emerging economies.
Tobias J. Klinge is a PhD researcher at KU Leuven, Belgium. He currently works on a project
examining corporate ﬁnancialization trajectories across various industries.
Rodrigo Fernandez is a research fellow at Trinity College Dublin, Ireland, and a senior
researcher at the Centre for Research on Multinational Corporations (SOMO), Amsterdam.
His research focuses on o ﬀshore ﬁnancial centers, shadow banking, real estate and
ﬁnancialization.
ORCID
Tobias J. Klinge http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9845-8658
References
Araujo, L. and Harrison, D. (2002 ) Path dependence, agency and technological evolution,
Technology Analysis & Strategic Management , 14(1), pp. 5 –19.
Bassens, D. and Van Meeteren, M. (2015 ) World cities under conditions of ﬁnancialized glo-
balization: Towards an augmented world city hypothesis, Progress in Human Geography ,
39(6), pp. 752 –775.
Beauvisage, T. and Mellet, K. ( 2020 ) Datassets: Assetizing and marketizing personal data, in:
K Birch, and F Muniesa (Eds) Assetization: Turning Things Into Assets in Technoscienti ﬁc
Capitalism , pp. 75 –95 (Cambridge (MA: The MIT Press).
Blanke, T. and Pybus, J. (2020 ) The material conditions of platforms: Monopolization
through decentralization, Social Media + Society , 6(4), pp. 1 –13.
Birch, K. (2020a ) Automated neoliberalism? The digital organisation of markets in technos-
cientiﬁc capitalism, New Formations, doi:10.3898/NEWF:100-101.02.2020
Birch, K. (2020b ) Technoscience rent: Toward a theory of rentiership for technoscienti ﬁc
capitalism, Science, Technology & Human Values , 45(1), pp. 3 –33.
Birch, K. and Cochrane, T. (2021 ) Big Tech: Four emerging forms of digital rentiership,
Science as Culture . Online ﬁrst:https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2021.1932794 .
Birch, K. and Muniesa, F. (Eds). (2020 )Assetization: Turning Things into Assets in
Technoscienti ﬁc Capitalism (Cambridge (MA): The MIT Press).
Boyka, M. (2020 ) SoftBank: Technology evangelist or hedge fund? Financial Times ,1
October. Available online: https://www.ft.com/content/4403ee1a-050f-4742-b967-
ba47b0f1de03 .
Braun, B. (2020 ) Central banking and the infrastructural power of ﬁnance: The case of ECB
support for repo and securitization markets, Socio-Economic Review , 18(2), pp. 395 –418.SCIENCE AS CULTURE 69
Christophers, B. (2019 ) The rentierization of the United Kingdom economy, Environment
and Planning A: Economy and Space , doi:10.1177/0308518X19873007
David, P. A. (1994 ) Why are institutions the ‘carriers of history ’? Path dependence and the
evolution of conventions, organizations, and institutions, Structural Change and
Economic Dynamics , 5(2), pp. 205 –220.
Dolata, U. (2018 ) Internet companies: Market concentration, competition and power, in: U
Dolata, and JF Schrape (Eds) Collectivity and Power on the Internet. A Sociological
Perspective , pp. 85 –108 (Wiesbaden: Springer).
Dolata, U. (2019 ) Privatization, curation, commodi ﬁcation: Commercial platforms on the
internet, Österreichische Zeitschrift für Soziologie , 44(1), pp. 181 –197.
Feld, H. (2019 ) The Case for the Digital Platform Act: Market Structure and Regulation of
Digital Platforms. Report. Roosevelt Institute. Available at: https://rooseveltinstitute.org/
wp-content/uploads/2020/07/RI-Case-for-the-Digital-Platform-Act-201905.pdf .
Fermigier, S. and Franck, S. (2020 ) Gaia-X: A trojan horse for Big Tech in Europe. Euractiv .
23 November. Available online: [ https://www.euractiv.com/section/digital/opinion/gaia-
x-a-trojan-horse-for-big-tech-in-europe/ ].
Fernandez, R. and Hendrikse, R. ( 2020 )Oﬀshore ﬁnance, in: P Mader, D Mertens, and N
Van der Zwan (Eds) International Handbook of Financialization , pp. 224 –237
(Abingdon: Routledge).
Fernandez, R., Adriaans, I., Klinge, T. J. and Hendrikse, R. ( 2020) Engineering digital mon-
opolies: The ﬁnancialisation of Big Tech. Report. Centre for Research of Multinational
Corporations (SOMO). Available at: https://www.somo.nl/the- ﬁnancialisation-of-big-tech/ .
Foroohar, R. (2019 )Don ’t Be Evil. How Big Tech Betrayed Its Founding Principles –and All of
Us(New York: Currency).
Freeman, C. and Louça, F. (2001 )As Time Goes by: From the Industrial Revolutions to the
Information Revolution (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Fuenfschilling, L. and Tru ﬀer, B. (2016 ) The interplay of institutions, actors and technol-
ogies in socio-technical systems: An analysis of transformations in the Australian
urban water sector, Technological Forecasting & Social Change , 103, pp. 298 –312.
Geels, F. W. (2002 ) Technological transitions as evolutionary recon ﬁguration processes: A
multi-level perspective and a case study, Research Policy , 31(8/9), pp. 1257 –1274.
Geels, F. W. (2004 ) From sectoral systems of innovation to socio-technical systems, Research
Policy , 33(6/7), pp. 897 –920.
Green ﬁeld, A. (2017 )Radical Technologies: The Design of Everyday Life (London: Verso).
Gruin, J. (2019 )Communists Constructing Capitalism: State, Market, and the Party in
China’ s Financial Reform (Manchester: Manchester University Press).
Hendrikse, R. (2021 ) The rise of neo-illiberalism, Krisis: Journal of Contemporary
Philosophy, 41(1), pp. 65 –93.
Hendrikse, R., Bassens, D. and Van Meeteren, M. ( 2018 ) The Appleization of ﬁnance:
Charting incumbent ﬁnance’ s embrace of FinTech, Finance and Society , 4(2), pp. 159 –180.
Jia, L. ( 2018 ) Going public and going global: Chinese Internet companies and global finance
networks, Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture , 13(1), pp. 17 –36.
Khan, L. M. (2018 ) Sources of tech platform power, Georgetown Law Technology Review ,2
(2), pp. 325 –334.
Klein, N. (2020 ) Screen New Deal: Under Cover of Mass Death, Andrew Cuomo Calls in the
Billionaires to Build a High-Tech Dystopia, The Intercept. 8 May. Available online:
[https://theintercept.com/2020/05/08/andrew-cuomo-eric-schmidt-coronavirus-tech-
shock-doctrine/ ].
Lamoreaux, N. R. (2019 ) The problem of bigness: From Standard Oil to Google, Journal of
Economic Perspectives , 33(3), pp. 94 –117.70 R. HENDRIKSE ET AL.
Langley, P. and Leyshon, A. (2017 ) Platform capitalism: The intermediation and capitalisa-
tion of digital economic circulation, Finance and Society , 3(1), pp. 11 –31.
Morozov, E. (2019 ) Capitalism ’s New Clothes. The Ba ﬄer, 4 February. Available online:
[https://theba ﬄer.com/latest/capitalisms-new-clothes-morozov ].
Peck, J. and Phillips, R. (2021 ) The platform conjuncture, Sociologica , 14(3), pp. 73 –99.
Perez, C. (2010 ) Technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms, Cambridge
Journal of Economics , 34(1), pp. 185 –202.
Plantin, J. C., Lagoze, C., Edwards, P. N. and Sandvig, C. ( 2018 ) Infrastructure studies meet
platform studies in the age of Google and Facebook, New Media & Society , 20(1), pp.
293–310.
Rahman, K. S. and Thelen, K. (2019 ) The rise of the platform business model and the trans-
formation of twenty- ﬁrst-century capitalism, Politics & Society .https://doi.org/10.1177/
0032329219838932.
Rikap, C. (2021 )Capitalism, Power and Innovation: Intellectual Monopoly Capitalism
Uncovered (Abingdon: Routledge).
Rostow, W. W. (1975 ) Kondratie ﬀ, Schumpeter, and Kuznets: Trend periods revisited, The
Journal of Economic History , 35(4), pp. 719 –753.
Santesteban, C. and Longpre, S. (2020 ) How Big data confers market power to Big Tech:
Leveraging the perspective of data science, The Antitrust Bulletin , 65(3), pp. 459 –485.
Sharma, N. ( 2020 ) Why the world needs to wake up to India ’s Jio. Quartz India .2 8
September. Available online: https://qz.com/india/1898734/with-facebook-google-
ambanis-jio-can-be-a-global-tech-leader/.
Srnicek, N. (2016 )Platform Capitalism (Cambridge: Polity Press).
Staab, P. (2019 )Digitaler Kapitalismus. Macht und Herrschaft in der Ökonomie der
Unknappheit (Berlin: Suhrkamp).
Stacey, K., Fontanella-Khan, J. and Palma, S. ( 2021 ) Big tech companies snap up smaller
rivals at record pace, Financial Times . 19 September. Available online: https://www.ft.
com/content/e2e34de1-c21b-4963-91e3-12d ﬀ5c69ba4 .
Tanda, A. and Schena, C. M. (2019 )FinTech, BigTech and Banks: Digitisation and its Impact
on Banking Business Models (Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan).
UNCTAD. (2018 ) Corporate rent-seeking, market power and inequality: Time for a multi-
lateral trust buster? UNCTAD Policy Brief 66: 4. Available online: https://unctad.org/
system/ﬁ les/oﬃ cial-document/presspb2018d3_en.pdf .
United States Senate Congressional House Committee on the Judiciary. ( 2020 )Investigation
of Competition in Digital Markets. Available online: Majority sta ﬀreport and recommen-
dations, subcommittee on antitrust, commercial and administrative law. Available online:
https://judiciary.house.gov/uploaded ﬁles/competition_in_digital_markets.pdf.
Van Dijck, J., Poell, T. and De Waal, M. ( 2018 )The Platform Society: Public Values in a
Connective World (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Volpicelli, G. ( 2020 ) Inside Dominic Cummings ’s coronavirus meeting with big tech. Wired ,
12 March. Available online: https://www.wired.co.uk/article/dominic-cummings-
coronavirus-big-tech .
Wark, M. (2019 )Capital Is Dead: Is This Something Worse? (London: Verso Books).
Webb, A. (2019 )The Big Nine: How the Tech Titans & Their Thinking Machines Could Warp
Humanity (New York: Public A ﬀairs).
Wu, T. (2018 )The Curse of Bigness. Antitrust in the New Gilded Age (New York: Columbia
Global Reports).
Zuboﬀ,S .( 2019 )The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the
New Frontier of Power (London: Proﬁ le Books).SCIENCE AS CULTURE 71
52Kyle Whyte
Crisis and colonialism
Colonisation is typically pitched as being about crisis. People who perpetrate colonialism often 
imagine that their wrongful actions are defensible because they are responding to some crisis. 
They assume that to respond to a crisis, it is possible to suspend certain concerns about jus-
tice and morality. Nineteenth-century European and American imperial colonialism in South 
America involved forcing Chinese persons, among other affected groups, into tortuous work 
conditions to extract and export guano, resulting in the devastation of ecosystems on guano 
islands. The goal of such violence to people and the environment was to resolve a crisis in soil 
chemistry caused by the intensive agricultural methods being used in some parts of Europe and 
North America (Foster and Clark 2020). The United States even passed the Guano Islands Act 
in 1856, which stated that Americans can seize control of any, “island, rock, or key, not within 
the lawful jurisdiction of any other Government” that has “a deposit of guano” (US Department 
of State 1856: online). In US settler colonialism, Americans in the first half of the 20th century 
constructed many dams that flooded Indigenous peoples such as Seneca and Lakota peoples. 
They did so because they believed the United States needed energy and irrigation to lessen the 
perceived threat of the Soviet Union in the Cold War (Barber 2005; Lawson 1994; Bilharz 2002; 
Rosier 2006; Rosier 1995). Or in the 19th and 20th centuries, US missionaries and teachers 
with particular religious values believed that it was morally acceptable to break up Indigenous 
families for the sake of saving Native persons’ souls and averting spiritual catastrophe (Stremlau 
2005; Archuleta et al. 2000). In these US cases, direct and indirect harms of settlers’ crisis-
response actions have devastating impacts on Indigenous peoples across ancestral, living, and 
emerging generations (Duran et al. 1998; Brave Heart 2000).
Colonial oppression that is allegedly defensible by real or perceived crises happens right 
now too. T oday, people perpetrate colonialism in the name of responding to environmental 
crises – climate change being one prominent case. Responses to scientifically understand and 
mitigate climate change can harm or threaten Indigenous peoples. From scientific reports that 
provincialise Indigenous knowledge systems to wind power projects that desecrate Indigenous 
lands, there is no reason to believe that colonialism today is something other than an evolved 
practice of a familiar form of power. What are the practices of knowing the world that make 4
Against crisis epistemology
Kyle WhyteAgainst crisis epistemology
 53 Against crisis epistemologyAgainst crisis epistemology
it possible to understand why someone would use crisis to mask colonial power? In this essay, 
I will focus on contemporary environmental crises, mainly climate change. But I understand 
that my speculations are possibly relevant to other crises as well as to other literatures on states 
of exception and necropolitics (Agamben 2008; Mbembé 2003). By climate change, I mean 
the destabilisation of ecological systems caused, to a significant degree, by the industrial emis-
sions of greenhouse gases. Destabilisation is exacerbated by industrially aggressive (ab)uses of 
land and water, including certain extractive and manufacturing enterprises, methods of energy 
production, intensive agriculture practices, and resource-hungry travel, consumption, and rec-
reational habits. One approach that I will take up involves how current crisis rhetoric on 
climate change is mediated by certain presumptions about the unfolding of time. By unfolding 
of time, I mean how the narrative of the significance of climate change is arranged according 
to a past, present, and future. As Candis Callison has shown, such presumptions of temporal 
unfolding affect how people come to know climate change, whether as crisis or as something 
else (Callison 2014).
Epistemologies of crisis involve knowing the world such that a certain present is experienced 
as new. Indigenous Studies scholars have done significant work on the temporal assumptions 
behind settler colonial power, such as ‘firsting’ (O’Brien 2010), ‘settler time’ (Rifkin 2017), and 
the ‘settler colonial present’ (Simpson 2017). They have critically exposed the liberal assump-
tions about the primacy of the settler state in national origin narratives (Turner 2006; Bruyneel 
2007; Nichols 2013). I seek to add to these ongoing conversations by focusing in particular on 
crisis. I seek to unravel some dimensions of the structure of newness that permits the validation 
of oppression. In particular, I will discuss the presumptions of unprecedentedness and urgency. In 
contradistinction to an epistemology of crisis, I will suggest that one interpretation of certain 
Indigenous knowledge traditions emphasises what I will just call here an epistemology of coor-
dination. Different from crisis, coordination refers to ways of knowing the world that emphasise 
the importance of moral bonds – or kinship relationships – for generating the (responsible) 
capacity to respond to constant change in the world. Epistemologies of coordination are con-
ducive to responding to mundane and expected change without validating harm or violence. 
Epistemologies of coordination are not offered here as some sort of ultimate solution to the 
current challenges people across the globe are facing. Although I’ve no problem claiming that 
epistemologies of coordination are much needed approaches to knowledge in education, cul-
ture, and society. Their practice would go a long way to transform unjust and immoral responses 
to real or perceived crises.
Epistemologies of crisis
In public Anishinaabe intellectual traditions, there’s a story of history and futurity that I’ve heard 
widely and read about too in several places. The story discusses seven or eight fires, depend-
ing on the telling. Each fire relates to a particular era of time. One of the foci of the story as 
it unfolds across the fires is the persistence and flourishing of Anishinaabe peoples in the face 
of diverse challenges, including social and environmental challenges. One such challenge is the 
emergence and increasing power of the settler population in North America. During several 
instances of the story, Anishinaabe people are expected to make critical decisions about how to 
interpret the newcomers’ intentions. There is concern about whether the settlers will show the 
face of death or the face of kinship and allyship. One of the warnings of the story is that the face 
of kinship can be superficially presented to mask what’s really the face of death. There is also a 
time of false promises that are tempting to accept, but the ramification of acceptance is suffering 
(Benton-Benai 1988; Gaikesheyongai and Keeshig-T obias 1994).
54Kyle Whyte 
The exact time in which this story may be referring to is not important to me here. Rather, 
the story generates insights we can all discuss about different periods of time in which colo-
nialism occurred in North America. Sometimes in these periods, settlers and other exploiters 
showed the face of kinship as a way to induce Indigenous persons to help them avert real or per-
ceived crises. The Meriam Report in the United States (1928) declared an emergency regarding 
the impact of poverty on Indigenous peoples, blaming, Indigenous ‘lack of adjustment’ but also 
US agricultural and land tenure policies and the funding for the Indian Service. One response, 
however, was for the Bureau of Indian Affairs under then director John Collier to rescue Tribes 
by corporatising Tribal governance. One of the vehicles of such corporatisation in the 1930s 
was the Indian Reorganization Act. The corporations were intended to facilitate the Tribally 
controlled lease of Indigenous lands, broker deals with extractive industries, and replace diverse 
Indigenous forms of governance with a one-size-fits-all American form of corporate govern-
ance. These measures were phrased as reform, economic development, and wealth generation, 
and partly inspired by forms of colonialism practiced in other parts of the world (Hauptman 
1986). Of course, the outcomes of the Indian Reorganization Act, depending on the Tribe, often 
involved the undermining of valuable traditional forms of governance, increasing dependence 
on extractive industries and commercial agriculture, and instigating divisions within Tribal soci-
eties between the interests and privileges of elected officials and Tribal citizens. The policies of 
this era are in some cases looked at as affirming dimensions of self-determination that have been 
denied under previous US regimes. And Collier is a complicated historical actor to interpret, 
given their advocacy of Indigenous cultures and Tribal sovereignty (Rusco 1991). Y et today it 
is true that some Tribal governments struggle to diversify their economies, protect health, and 
implement culturally relevant programs and forms of governance due to some of the barriers to 
self-determination that can reasonably be attributed to the Indian Reorganization Act period 
(and evolving since then through other policies) (Rusco 2000; Clow 1987; Ranco and Fleder 
2005). In terms of the Indian Reorganization Act, the crisis of the impacts of poverty served as 
a basis for some settlers to show themselves (problematically) as kin or allies. Under the guise of 
addressing poverty, it can be argued that US settler society expanded its control over Indigenous 
peoples.
A crisis epistemology, in the context of settler colonialism, might look something like this. 
A crisis is believed to be happening, whether real, genuine, or perceived. The crisis may be 
articulated as related to many problems, including health, economic well-being, environmental 
sustainability, cultural integrity, and religious salvation. But what makes some state of affairs of 
the world crisis-oriented is the automatic assumption of imminence. By imminence, I mean the 
sense that something horribly harmful or inequitable is impending or pressing on the present 
conditions people understand themselves to be living in. There is a complexity or originality to 
the imminent events that suggests the need to immediately become solutions-oriented in a way 
believed to differ from how solutions were designed and enacted previously.
One possible structure of a crisis epistemology that I’ve sometimes seen is a presentist nar-
rative. By structure, I just mean how something (here, a way of knowing the world) is organ-
ised, which includes what it’s made up of and how it’s put together. As a structure of crisis, 
a narrative is made up of time. A narrative is a way someone arranges the unfolding of time 
and articulates that arrangement to others. That a narrative is presentist means that time is put 
together (arranged) to favor a certain conception of the present as a means of achieving power 
or protecting privilege. Presentism of different kinds has been examined in Indigenous Studies 
as an exercise of colonial power and an effacement of the realities and conditions of that power. 
Audra Simpson, for example, writes that the ‘settler colonial present’ is one of ‘purported new-
ness’. It is “… revealed as the fiction of the presumed neutrality of time itself, demonstrating the 
 55 Against crisis epistemology
dominance of the present by some over others, and the unequal power to define what matters, 
who matters, what pasts are alive and when they die” (Simpson 2017: 21). In this way, someone 
becomes so concerned with the present crisis as new that they question neither their own per-
spective nor where their perspective may derive its social origins.
In terms of epistemologies of crisis, I want to discuss two presumptions about the presentist 
unfolding of time. There are of course more presumptions. I focus on the following. The cri-
ses are unprecedented. That is, they are ones in which there are few usable lessons from the past 
about how to cope with the problems of today generated by crises. Sometimes today’s crises 
are considered to have the novelty of being complex beyond anything previously encountered. 
The next presumption is that the crises are urgent, which means that they must be responded to 
quickly. When responsive actions are taken urgently, certain harmful consequences of the actions 
to humans or any other beings, entities, or systems are considered to be unfortunate, but accept-
able. Each of these two presumptions of presentism, and there are of course more, can easily be 
abused for the sake of advancing colonial power, even in cases where the perpetrators would 
swear they have only the best intentions.
The presumption of unprecedentedness makes it possible to willfully forget certain previous 
instances or lessons related to a crisis. Regarding climate change, for example, media, scientific, 
and political discourses proclaim that this the first time in which the United States has engaged 
in the resettlement of Indigenous communities due to coastal erosion in the Arctic, Pacific 
Northwest, and the Gulf of Mexico. These discourses reference conflicts about power (i.e. who 
gets to decide whether to resettle and how). They reference concerns expressed by Indigenous 
persons that climate change resettlement is just the latest term for further territorial dispossession. 
They cite complex legal, bureaucratic, economic, cultural, and political hurdles Indigenous peo-
ples are facing in resettlement processes sponsored by the United States, state, and local govern-
ments. Of course, the unprecedentedness is not true. Going back at least to the 19th century, the 
United States has used complex laws, policies, tax codes, property rights, and financial instru-
ments (i.e. mortgages, leases) to remove and resettle Indigenous peoples in ways that imposed 
conflicts of power, hurdles, and territorial dispossession. Cases include long (many hundreds of 
miles) removals, such as the forced resettlement of Tribes to Indian T erritory (Oklahoma), but 
also policies to relocate Indigenous families to live permanently in large urban centers. They 
include the shrinking of vast Indigenous territories to exponentially smaller reservations and 
the complete liquidation of entire Tribal homelands into private property or public lands (e.g. 
national parks), which led to major demographic shifts. These resettlements ultimately served 
to further entrench the territorial power of the United States in Indigenous homelands. The 
reality that the United States has been in the resettlement business for generations is lost in dis-
courses about climate change. Lost too are the lessons Indigenous peoples learned across their 
histories of resistance and problem-solving having experienced different forms of resettlement 
before those associated with climate change today (Marino 2012; Crepelle 2018; Krakoff 2011; 
Watkinson 2015). So the crisis of climate change resettlement perceived through a presentist 
narrative obscures how the United States has yet to come to terms with numerous historic 
instances of forced resettlement. When people get caught up in the imminence of presentism – 
which absents the violence and tribulations of diverse ancestors – their actions run severe risks 
of retrenching colonial power through evolved but familiar practices that will be harmful to 
living and future generations.
The presumption of urgency suggests that swiftness of action is needed to cope with immi-
nence. There either may be moral sacrifices that have to be made or ethics and justice are not 
elevated to a level of serious attention. The urgency of the cold war and national security, for 
example, made it somehow acceptable for US politicians to be open about the sacrifices that 
56Kyle Whyte 
they believed were justified. In one case, during the inundation caused by the opening of Dalles 
dam in Oregon in the 1950s, a major fishery, Celilo Falls, was inundated. A US Senator stated, 
“our Indian friends deserve from us a profound and heartfelt salute of appreciation. … They 
contributed to [the dam’s] erection a great donation – surrender of the only way of life which 
some of them knew” (Barber 2005: 4). Regarding climate change, there is a similar suspension 
of the consideration of ethics and justice. Rapidly growing literatures and technical reports are 
showing that, in the United States and globally, clean energy solutions for mitigating the rise in 
global average temperature are unjust or harmful to Indigenous peoples across the planet. The 
injustices and harms include economic deprivation and land dispossession and desecration. They 
also include the silencing of Indigenous leadership, knowledge, and voices in law, policy, and 
administration pertaining to mitigation measures (Suagee 2012; Bronin 2012; Beymer-Farris 
and Bassett 2012; Dussais 2014; Avila 2017; Nguh and Sanyanga 2013; Tauli-Corpuz and Lynge 
2008; Howe 2019; Hoang et al. 2019). Victoria Tauli-Corpuz and Aqqaluk Lynge document 
some of the early precedents of this injustice in climate mitigation programs. In the 1990s, the 
Forest Absorbing Carbon Dioxide Emission Foundation (FACE) of the Netherlands and the 
Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) created a carbon offset plantation of eucalyptus trees at 
Mount Elgon National Park of Uganda that would offset energy utilities in the Netherlands. 
They write that:
While project coordinators claim that the plantation has improved the lives of the people 
around the park, the indigenous people themselves (the Benet) say the exact opposite. After 
the declaration of Mount Elgon as a national park in 1993, the UWA violently forced the 
residents of Mount Elgon to leave the area and move to caves and mosques in neighbor-
ing villages. Park rangers killed more than 50 people in 2004. In addition, the project took 
away what little income the people had from their lands and crops. The villagers are not 
allowed to graze their cows and goats in the area or to obtain food or important traditional 
materials from the forest.
(T auli-Corpuz and Lynge 2008: 16)
While the conditions that make such violence possible persist today, many climate change advo-
cates are adamant that such morally uncontrolled and unwise measures must happen now to 
avert crisis before oppression can addressed. Expression of this adamancy is a daily occurrence 
in some places. I recently read an article in Vice in which the journalist interviewed Jonathan 
Morgan of the advocacy group Extinction Rebellion, who said in 2020: “I can’t say it hard 
enough. We don’t have time to argue about social justice” (Dembicki 2020: online). Y et, if a 
forest conservation project displaces Indigenous peoples from their lands, for example, where is 
the better environmental future for that Indigenous peoples? A similar question can be posed 
to energy coming from wind, solar, biofuel, and nuclear sources. Catherine Sandoval shows in 
their research how the United States never fairly included Indigenous peoples in the energy 
grid system (Sandoval 2018). Given this reality, ‘social justice’ would be necessary for Indigenous 
peoples to benefit from and be leaders in renewable energy. In British Columbia, the Site C 
mega dam was conceived in ways that violated Indigenous peoples’ rights and treaties and had 
numerous negative environmental impacts (Hendriks, Raphals, Bakker and Christie 2017). The 
dam will provide energy to the province that will crowd out from energy markets some First 
Nations who were building renewable energy projects on their own (Gilpin 2019; Cox 2018). 
So, again, projects for clean or renewable energy or carbon footprint reduction will repeat the 
moral wrongs and injustices of the past. Hence the presentist narrative gets caught up in immi-
nence through presumptions of urgency, generating harm and risks that burden Indigenous 
 57 Against crisis epistemology
peoples, and retrench colonial power. Again, we must make careful judgements about the face 
of kinship (stopping climate change) when we seek to take action to mitigate and prepare for 
climate change.
In thinking through the implications of unprecedentedness and urgency, climate change, as a 
concept, is a rhetorical device that people invoke so they can believe they are addressing a crisis 
without having to talk about colonial power. Epistemologies of crisis are presentist in their nar-
rative orientation. Presentist orientations can favor dimensions of experiencing time in ways that 
presume unprecedentedness and urgency. Epistemologies of crisis then mask numerous forms 
of power, including colonialism, imperialism, capitalism, patriarchy, and industrialisation. The 
literature on colonialism and environmental crises is conveying just this point (Stein et al. 2017; 
Gergan et al. 2018; Anson 2017; Hurley 2020). Mabel Gergan, Sara Smith and Pavithra Vasudevan 
refer to certain apocalyptic and catastrophic deployments of the anthropocene and climate crisis 
as “temporal sleight of hand” (2018: 2). In their study examining “scientific debates and cultural 
representations”, they claim that many “imaginings of apocalypse” work to “escape specific cul-
pability (for instance, in processes of settler colonialism, capitalism, or imperialism) and instead 
center a universal human frailty that ends with triumph, a clear moral, and a clean slate” (Gergan 
et al. 2018: 2). The feeling of imminence that accompanies presentism leads people to obscure 
and overshadow how their actions relate to the persistence of different forms of power.
Epistemologies of coordination
Basil Johnston, from their work with Anishinaabe elders and archives, describes an Anishinaabe 
story that discusses one of the origins of humans. Humans and animals live interdependently: 
“[w]ithout the animals the world would not have been; without the animals the world would 
not be intelligible” (Johnston 1990: 49). Animals provided nourishment, ‘shelter’, ‘joy’ and vol-
untary ‘labor’ on behalf of humans. Humans and animals could communicate directly with one 
another. Y et humans subjected animals to abuse, taking for granted the services that animals had 
previously performed ‘without complaint’. Johnston writes that:
At last, weary of service, the animals convened a great meeting to gain their freedom. All 
came at the invitation of the courier. The bear was chosen to be the first speaker and to act 
as chairman of the session. He explained the purpose of the meeting. ‘We are met to decide 
our destiny. We have been oppressed far too long by man. He has taken our generosity and 
repaid us with ingratitude; he has taken our labors and repaid us with servitude; he has 
taken our friendship and fostered enmity among us’.
(1990: 50)
In this excerpt, humans couldn’t possibly survive and flourish without animals. Y et animals were 
being abused. There is an ecological crisis. Y et what generates the crisis in the story is when 
one group – humans – abused the relationships of interdependence. Humans took domineer-
ing actions against animals that failed to demonstrate care, reciprocity, or respect for consent. 
If the interdependence of species can be related to environmental protection, then repairing 
relationships of justice and equality are inseparable from actions needed to achieve biodiversity 
conservation and climate change mitigation. This story is not a presentist narrative. For crisis is 
interpreted through a deeper history, and traced to the moral bonds of relationships among the 
diverse beings and entities dwelling together in shared environments. Something like a crisis 
cannot be understood without appealing to the history of moral bonds between the beings and 
entities affected by a real or perceived crisis.
58Kyle Whyte 
Stories like this one published by Basil Johnston suggest to me an epistemology of coordina-
tion, not an epistemology of crisis. Epistemologies of coordination emphasise coming to know 
the world through kin relationships. There are certainly a lot of ways to talk about and define 
the meaning of kin. Here I want to take a particular focus. Kinship relationships refer to moral 
bonds that are often expressed as mutual responsibilities. The moral bonds are similar to familial 
relationships in the sense of local and broader families that can engage responsibly in coordinated 
action together to achieve particular goals that they have. Examples of kinship relationships are 
care, consent, and reciprocity, among others.
Indigenous scholars have written about how Indigenous communities came to know and 
address US settler colonialism through harnessing kinship to generate coordinated responses. 
Mishuana Goeman has interpreted a wide range of contemporary and historic Indigenous 
women writers and artists. Goeman’s work shows how Indigenous communities develop and 
renew kinship relationships to achieve coordination in challenging times, such as during the era 
where the United States relocated many Indigenous families to large urban areas (Goeman 2009; 
Lone-Knapp 2000). They write that:
As Seneca scholar Faye Lone suggests, it is important to look at our social, political, and 
certainly cultural relationships in a ‘frame-work that allows relatedness to a flexible spatial 
community, one that allows for strong, mobile, symbolic identity that underlies, and perhaps 
even belies, external influences’.
(Goeman 2009: 185)
In the same article, Goeman also writes:
Often, it was necessary for women to practice gendered relations outside the cultural forms 
learned from their mothers, aunties and grandmothers. These practices of relating to each 
other were not ‘outdated’ in the city, but instead the elements of these practices that per-
sisted were and continue to be vital to Native navigations in urban centers. In many ways, 
the lack of the dominant culture’s understanding of Native peoples’ capacity to reach out 
to others beyond their specific Tribal Nation was a major flaw in the goals of Relocation 
policy. In fact, the propensity for sharing where one is from and learning to live with each 
other comes from thousands of years of experience living on this continent together – it is 
as instinctive as breathing.
(Goeman 2009: 175)
Goeman’s work focuses then on understanding how new networks are formed that rely on 
moral bonds that can be associated with different people and practices. For Goeman, what 
defines Indigenous peoples are not only particular cultural practices. Rather, it is a capacity 
to renew important kin relations in ways that support coordination in response to change 
(Goeman 2009).
Goeman cites Susan Lobo’s work on urban clan mothers. Lobo writes that urban clan moth-
ers are leaders and facilitators in networks of relationships:
Key households that provide a degree of permanence in the swirl of constant shifts and 
changes in the highly fluid urban Indian communities. These households gathering spots 
often provide short term or extended housing and food for many people, health and 
healing practices and advice, a location for ceremony emotional and spiritual support, 
 59 Against crisis epistemology
entertainment, and transportation and communication resources. They are also often vital 
spots of linkage with more rural communities and tribal homelands.
(Lobo 2003: 505)
In my view, these households and places are based on kinship relationships that are valued because 
of their capacity to be responsive to change. This includes the crisis-like changes of urban relo-
cation in the mid-20th century. Goeman’s and Lobo’s work, read in relation to Johnston’s story, 
at least suggest for me what I interpret to be epistemologies of coordination. There is a presump-
tion of constant change (not presentism). But the strategy for response involves fostering kinship 
relationships. And kinship relationships have high standards responsibility, with special attention 
to relationships of care, reciprocity, and consent, among others.
Diverse Indigenous Studies research has demonstrated epistemologies that I would inter-
pret as centering how to organise a society to be coordinated in the face of realities of 
constant change. Vicente Diaz’s research Micronesian seafaring knowledge discusses the rela-
tionship between the science of navigation and motion. Instead of humans being knowers 
who move around stationary islands, it is rather the islands that move. Kinship relationships are 
critical to the formation of coordination in a constantly moving world (Diaz 2011). Brenda 
Child’s historical research on women and conservation traditions (e.g., wild rice) demon-
strates how Ojibwe women exercised central responsibilities in networks of coordination that 
were critical to navigating crises caused by colonialism. Ben Colombi’s work with Nez Perce 
people on their resilience and adaptive capacity emphasises the kinship relationships, includ-
ing leadership traditions, that supported coordinated responses to harsh colonial conditions 
(Colombi 2012).
Epistemologies of coordination are focused just as much on responses to crises. Relocation, 
for example, was an actual crisis for those who experienced it. Colonialism has inflicted numer-
ous crises on Indigenous peoples. At the same time, there is no presentist interpretation of crisis 
and no sense of imminence. Rather, epistemologies of coordination come to know the world 
through the state of kinship relationships. A world or situation that has members with active 
kinship relationships of care, consent, and reciprocity is one where the members have the capac-
ity to respond in coordinated ways to change that are supportive of their mutual well-being, 
whether the members are humans, animals, and/or diverse others. A world or situation lack-
ing in these bonds is one in which some members will respond to change in ways that lead to 
deeply unjust and immoral actions and outcomes. T o see the world through kinship relationships 
that are central to coordination requires a non-presentist mode of knowledge and a capacity 
to not be caught up in imminence. For one has to have a sober and detailed conception of the 
history of kinship relationships and how they have changed or evolved over the years based on 
changes like, say, US colonialism. As a massive breach of kinship, especially in terms of violations 
of care, consent, and reciprocity, it becomes clear that today’s situation or world must attend 
to the establishment or repair of those relationships: whether that is a process that Indigenous 
peoples do on their own, no matter what the rest of the world does, or whether that process is 
one that allies also participate in.
No solutions without kinship
Indigenous scholars and leaders acknowledge that the world today is far from being a place 
where what I am calling epistemologies of coordination are common. People do not come to 
know the world through the degrees of kinship relationships. Mary Arquette writes reflectively 
60Kyle Whyte 
their views of how Haudenosaunee people have altered their relationships with some non-
human relatives, violating ancient kinship relationships in certain cases, such as the over-harvest-
ing of fur-bearing animals (e.g. beavers) during the transatlantic fur trade period several hundred 
years ago. They write in the context that Haudenosaunee were responding to complex colonial 
forces during the fur trade. Arquette traces out what the implications are for environmental 
sustainability today, without apologising for the ramifications of kinship that may have been 
violated historically:
When a person decides to forget ethics requiring respect for the natural world, it is not 
difficult for that individual to also lose respect for themselves, their families, and other 
human beings. In this case, not only did the fur bearers suffer from this destruction, but 
Haudenosaunee elders, women and children also suffered as a result of the violence, alco-
holism, jealousy, mistrust and family and community breakdown that resulted. It took a 
reminder from our Creator and a spiritual revival for our people to begin to move away 
from these destructive behaviors. Many believe that if we had not been reminded to return 
to our own spiritual beliefs, then the Haudenosaunee may not have survived as distinct 
people. The struggle goes on to this day. In fact, some may question whether our commu-
nities will ever recover from the wars that we waged on the fur bearers. We certainly will 
never forget what happened and to this day, continue to have a special obligation to the fur 
bearing animals to make amends for our past mistakes.
(Arquette 2000: 92–3)
For Arquette, the relationship between humans and animals, among other beings of non-human 
world, has been changed over time to the point where many moral bonds are absent. For the war 
waged against the beavers – at least in my interpretation – was a violation of kinship in terms of 
care, consent, and reciprocity.
In Arquette’s philosophy, it is critical to note that they have no reason to believe that the 
relationships with nonhumans will be repaired: “[i]n fact, some may question whether our com-
munities will ever recover from the wars that we waged on the fur bearers” (Arquette 2000: 
92–3). This statement resists an epistemology of crisis. If the focus of knowing the world is 
on kinship relationships, then it is quite possible to wonder whether in today’s time that it is 
possible to restore kin. For kinship relationships cannot be established overnight. Many of the 
most important kinship relationships take time to develop. There is no guarantee that during 
the time it takes to develop those relationships, that certain issues within ecological systems will 
simply be repaired. The weight of kinship is very different from the sense of imminence in crisis 
epistemologies.
The skepticism inherent in a number of Indigenous authors is intertwined with their ada-
mancy about seeking sustainability and justice in the face of climate change. Skepticism is not 
necessarily the right word. It is more of a realism, where realism contrasts with crisis-oriented 
feelings of imminence. As Dan Wildcat discusses:
In North America many indigenous traditions tell us that reality is more than just facts and 
figures collected so that humankind might widely use resources. Rather, to know ‘it’ – real-
ity – requires respect for the relationships and relatives that constitute the complex web of 
life. I call this indigenous realism, and it entails that we, members of humankind, accept our 
inalienable responsibilities as members of the planet’s complex life system, as well as our 
inalienable rights.
(2009: xi)
 61 Against crisis epistemology
Relationships and relatives are precisely those kinship relationships. For Wildcat, what I read 
as an epistemology of coordination emphasises the significance of kinship (e.g. ‘relatives’, ‘com-
plex web of life’) for the coordination needed to live in a complex world.
Jeanette Armstrong, who has written and organised widely on the importance of caretak-
ing for the land (Armstrong 1998), expresses realism about whether humans will be able to be 
sustainable:
That issue in our traditional teachings is: every year, continuously, the people who are care-
takers, and people who are careful of the harvest, whoever they might be, are reminded at 
our ceremonies and at our feasts, that that is what our responsibility and our intelligence 
and our creativity as human beings are about. That’s what the gift of being human is about. 
If we cannot measure up to that, and we cannot live up to that, we’re not needed here, and 
we won’t be here. It’s really becoming evident that we’re a huge percentage in that direc-
tion of not being here.
(Armstrong 2007: 4)
Armstrong’s statement resists an epistemology of crisis and has a sense of realism. Similar to pre-
vious authors, they speak of kinship and coordination, including care, reciprocity, responsibility, 
ceremony/feasts, and intelligence/creativity (autonomy).
In my reading of their work, de Oliveira Andreotti, Stein, Ahenakew and Hunt (2015) have 
outlined an approach to living in times of crises that emphasise what I am referring to as kin-
ship. ‘Crisis’ and ‘unpredictability’ can, “… leave little time and few spaces for exploring the 
complexities, tensions and paradoxes of decolonizing work without an immediate need for reso-
lution, coherence and prescriptive action” (de Oliveira Andreotti et al. 2015: 22). Their “social 
cartography approach” emphasises “hospicing”, among other approaches, which:
Would entail sitting with a system in decline, learning from its history, offering palliative 
care, seeing oneself in that which is dying, attending to the integrity of the process, dealing 
with tantrums, incontinence, anger and hopelessness, ‘cleaning up’, and clearing the space 
for something new. This is unlikely to be a glamorous process.
(de Oliveira Andreotti et al. 2015: 22)
Their work suggests that what I am calling epistemologies of coordination are likely to be rather 
incompatible with epistemologies of crisis. For part of an epistemology of crisis involves their 
being solutions that can occur quickly, maintain the current state of affairs, lack any sense of 
realism, and further entrench power. Moreover, though I did not focus on this here in this essay, 
there is an underlying conception of heroism involved in epistemologies of crisis that is morally 
problematic (de Oliveira Andreotti et al. 2015; Whyte 2018).
Epistemologies of coordination are not presentist. They accept the realism that some kinship 
relationships take time to develop, which means that they are not necessarily going to always buy 
into imminence. The sense of imminence in epistemologies of crisis makes some people believe 
that it is possible to make a transformation in the world in ways that ensure societies can bounce 
back to some current state of affairs. Given that, for many Indigenous peoples, the current state 
of affairs is one that people are trying to move beyond given how it has been shaped negatively 
by oppression. This means that what appears as an acceptance of an inevitable end is more akin 
to a deep motivation to create a better world. For a better world must arise through actions that 
honor the significance of ethical and just relationships and that remain vigilant to the operation 
and repetition of oppression. Epistemologies of coordination have a sense of realism to them. 
62Kyle Whyte 
Epistemologies of crisis are likely to be incompatible with this way of knowing. People caught 
up in epistemologies of crisis place an emphasis on presentism. This emphasis makes it so that 
they are obsessed with saving some conception of the current state of affairs because they feel 
the imminence of crisis. The obsession obscures how everyone one else may experience today’s 
world. And the sense of imminence overshadows the realism needed to remember how colonial 
and other forms of power engendered the current state of affairs and how these forms of power 
are poised to retrench.
Conclusions
Indigenous responses to crises are certainly adamant and compelling. But they are not reliant 
on certain epistemologies of crisis. Such an epistemology organises knowledge in ways that 
emphasise some narrative of the imminence of a threat to the present. Without any emphasis on 
kinship relationships and the time it takes to develop them, epistemologies of crisis can validate 
the violation of moral bonds. Epistemologies of coordination are very different – but not less 
responsive to serious changes that can be deemed crisis level. Epistemologies of coordination 
organise knowledge through the vector of kinship relationships. They do not tradeoff kinship 
relationships to satisfy desires for imminent action. As crises like climate change continue to 
motivate people to take swift, solution-oriented actions, epistemologies of coordination draw 
attention to the problems of how presentism and imminence can betray ethics and justice. They 
have a realism to them. Epistemologies of coordination assess the impacts of actions by their 
contributions to the quality of kinship relationships.
References
Agamben, G. (2008). State of Exception. University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL.
Anson, A. (2017). ‘American apocalypse: The whitewashing genre of settler colonialism’, Academia.edu, 
1–10. Available: https ://ww w.aca demia .edu/ 34949 190/A meric an_Ap ocaly pse_T he_Wh itewa shing 
_Genr  e_of_ Settl er_Co lonia lism, accessed May 20, 2020.
Archuleta, M., Child, B.J., and Lomawaima, K.T. (2000). Away from Home: American Indian Boarding School 
Experiences 1879–2000. Heard Museum: Santa Fe, NM.
Armstrong, J. (1998). ‘Land speaking’, in S. Ortiz (ed.) Speaking for the Generations: Native Writers on Writing. 
Sun Tracks: An American Indian Literary Series. University of Arizona Press: Tucson, AZ, 174–194.
Armstrong, J. (2007). ‘Native perspectives on sustainability: Jeannette Armstrong (Syilx) [Interview 
transcript]’, Native Perspectives on Sustainability, 1–15. Available: www.nativeperspectives.net, accessed 
May 20, 2020.
Arquette, M. (2000). ‘The animals’, in Haudenosaunee Environmental Task Force (eds.) Words that Come 
Before all Else. Haudenosaunee Environmental Task Force: Akwesasne, 82–101.
Avila, S. (2017). ‘Contesting energy transitions: Wind power and conflicts in the isthmus of tehuantepec’, 
Journal of Political Ecology, vol 24: 992–1012.
Barber, K. (2005). Death of Celilo Falls. Center for the Study of the Pacific Northwest in association with 
University of Washington Press: Seattle, WA.
Benton-Benai, E. (1988). The Mishomis Book: The Voice of the Ojibway. Indian Country Communications: 
Hayward, WI.
Beymer-Farris, B.A. and Bassett, T.J. (2012). ‘The REDD menace: Resurgent protectionism in Tanzania's 
mangrove forests’, Global Environmental Change, vol. 22: 332–341.
Bilharz, J.A. (2002). The Allegany Senecas and Kinzua Dam: Forced Relocation Through Two Generations. 
University of Nebraska Press: Lincoln, NE.
Brave Heart, M.Y .H. (2000). ‘Wakiksuyapi: Carrying the historical trauma of the Lakota’, Tulane Studies in 
Social Welfare, vol 21: 245–266.
Bronin, S. (2012). ‘The promise and perils of renewable energy on tribal lands’, in S.A. Krakoff and E. 
Rosser (eds.) Tribes, Land, and the Environment. Ashgate: Burlington, VT, 103–117.
 63 Against crisis epistemology
Bruyneel, K. (2007). The Third Pace of Sovereignty: The Postcolonial Politics of U.S.–Indigenous Relations. 
University of Minnesota Press: Minneapolis, MN.
Callison, C. (2014). How Climate Change Comes to Matter: The Communal Life of Facts. Duke University Press: 
Durham, NC.
Clow, R. (1987). ‘The Indian reorganization act and the loss of tribal sovereignty: Constitutions on the 
rosebud and pine ridge reservations’, Great Plains Quarterly, vol 7: 125–134.
Colombi, B.J. (2012). ‘Salmon and the adaptive capacity of Nimiipuu (Nez Perce) culture to cope with 
change’, The American Indian Quarterly, vol. 36: 75–97.
Cox, S. (2018). ‘B.C. first nations forced to shelve clean energy projects as site C dam overloads grid’, 
in The Narhwal, Victoria, BC. Available: https ://th enarw hal.c a/b-c -firs t-nat ions- force d-she lve-c lean- 
energ y-pro jects -site -c-da m-ove rload s-gri d/, accessed 19 May 2020.
Crepelle, A. (2018). ‘The United States first climate relocation: recognition, relocation, and Indigenous 
rights at the Isle de Jean Charles’, Belmont Law Review, vol 6: 1–40.
de Oliveira Andreotti, V ., Stein, S., Ahenakew, C., and Hunt, D. (2015). ‘Mapping interpretations of 
decolonization in the context of higher education’, Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society, vol. 
4: 21–40.
Dembicki, G. (2020). ‘A debate over racism has plit one of the world’s most famous climate groups’, Vice.
com, April 28. Available: https ://ww w.vic e.com /en_u s/art icle/ jgey8 k/a-d ebate -over -raci sm-ha s-spl 
it-on e-of- the-w  orlds -most -famo us-cl imate -grou ps, accessed 19 May 2020.
Diaz, V .M.. (2011). ‘Voyaging for anti-colonial recovery: Austronesian seafaring, archipelagic rethinking, and 
the re-mapping of indigeneity’, Pacific Asia Inquiry, vol 2: 21–32.
Duran, E., Duran, B., Brave Heart, M.Y .H., et al. (1998). ‘Healing the American Indian soul wound’, in 
Yael Danieli (ed.) International Handbook of Multigenerational Legacies of Trauma. Springer: New Y ork,  
341–354.
Dussais, A.M. (2014). ‘Room for a (sacred view)? American Indian tribes confront visual desecration caused 
by wind energy projects’, American Indian Law Review, vol 38: 336–420.
Foster, J.B. and Clark, B. (2020). The Robbery of Nature: Capitalism and the Ecological Rift. Monthly Review 
Press: Eugene, OR.
Gaikesheyongai, S. and Keeshig-T obias, P . (1994). The Seven Fires: An Ojibway Prophecy. Sister Vision Press: 
T oronto, ON.
Gergan, M., Smith, S., and Vasudevan, P . (2018). ‘Earth beyond repair: Race and apocalypse in collective 
imagination’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, vol 38: 91–110.
Gilpin, E. (2019). ‘Our own hands’, in Canada's National Observer, Vancouver, BC. Available: https ://ww 
w.nat ional obser  ver.c om/20 19/03 /28/c lean- energ y-ali gns-w ho-we -are- indig enous -peop le/, accessed 
19 May 2020.
Goeman, M. (2009). ‘Notes toward a native feminism’s spatial practice’, Wicazo Sa Review, vol 24: 169–187.
Hauptman, L.M. (1986). ‘Africa view: John Collier, the British colonial service and American Indian policy 
1933–1945’, The Historian, vol 48: 359–374.
Hendriks, R., Raphals, P ., Bakker, K., and Christie, G. (2017). ‘First nations and hydropower: The case of 
British Columbia's site C Dam project’, in Items. Social Science Research Council of Canada: T oronto, 
ON. Available: https ://it ems.s src.o rg/ju st-en  viron ments /firs t-nat ions- and-h  ydrop ower- the-c ase-o f-bri 
tish- colum bias- site- c-dam -proj ect/, accessed 19 May 2020.
Hoang, C., Satyal, P ., and Corbera, E. (2019). ‘“This is my garden”: Justice claims and struggles over forests 
in Vietnam’s REDD+’, Climate Policy, vol 19: S23–S35.
Howe, C. (2019). Ecologics: Wind and Power in the Anthropocene. Duke University Press: Durham, NC.
Hurley, J. (2020). Infrastructures of Apocalypse. University of Minnesota Press: Minneapolis, MN.
Johnston, B. (1990). Ojibway Heritage. University of Nebraska Press: Lincoln, NE.
Krakoff, S. (2011). ‘Radical adaptation, justice, and American Indian nations’, Environmental Justice, vol 4: 
207–212.
Lawson, M.L. (1994). Dammed Indians: The Pick-Sloan Plan and the Missouri River Sioux 1944-1980. 
University of Oklahoma Press: Norman, OK.
Lobo, S. (2003). ‘Urban clan mothers: Key households in cities’, American Indian Quarterly, vol 27: 505–522.
Lone-Knapp, F . (2000). ‘Rez talk: How reservation residents describe themselves’, American Indian Quarterly, 
vol 24: 635–640.
Marino, E. (2012). ‘The long history of environmental migration: Assessing vulnerability construction and 
obstacles to successful relocation in Shishmaref, Alaska’, Global Environmental Change, vol 22: 374–381.
Mbembé, A. (2003). ‘Necropolitics L. Meintjes (trans.)’, Public Culture, vol 15: 11–40.
64Kyle Whyte 
Meriam, Lewis.  (1928). The Problem of Indian Administration: Report of a Survey made at the Request of Honorable 
Hubert Work, Secretary of the Interior, and Submitted to Him, February 21, 1928/Survey Staff: Lewis Meriam 
...[et al.]. Johns Hopkins Press: Baltimore, MD.
Nguh, A. and Sanyanga, R. (2013). Corruption and Infrastructure Megaprojects in the DR Congo. International 
Rivers: Oakland, CA.
Nichols, R. (2013). ‘Indigeneity and the settler contract today’, Philosophy and Social Criticism, vol 39: 
165–186.
O'Brien, J.M. (2010). Firsting and Lasting: Writing Indians out of Existence in New England. University of 
Minnesota Press: Minneapolis, MN.
Ranco, D. and Fleder, A. (2005). ‘Tribal environmental sovereignty: Cultural appropriate protection or 
paternalism?’ Journal of Natural Resources and Environmental Law, vol 19: 35–58.
Rifkin, M. (2017). Beyond Settler Time: Temporal Sovereignty and Indigenous Self-Determination. Duke University 
Press: Durham, NC.
Rosier, P .C. (1995). ‘Dam building and treaty breaking: The Kinzua Dam controversy 1936-1958’, The 
Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography, vol 119: 345–368.
Rosier, P .C. (2006). ‘“They are ancestral homelands”: Race, place, and politics in cold war Native America 
1945–1961’, The Journal of American History, vol 92: 1300–1326.
Rusco, E.R. (1991). ‘John Collier: Rrchitect of sovereignty or assimilation?’, American Indian Quarterly, vol 
15: 49–54.
Rusco, E.R. (2000). A Fateful Time: The Background and Legislative History of The Indian Reorganization Act. 
University of Nevada Press: Reno, NV .
Sandoval, C.J. (2018). ‘Energy access is energy justice: The Y urok tribe’s trailblazing work to close the native 
American reservation electricity gap’, in R. Salter, C.G. Gonzalez, and M.H. Dworkin (eds.) Energy 
Justice. Edward Elgar Publishing: Cheltenham, 166–207.
Simpson, A. (2017). ‘The ruse of consent and the anatomy of “refusal”: Cases from Indigenous North 
America and Australia’, Postcolonial Studies, vol 20: 18–33.
Stein, S., Hunt, D., Suša, R.., and de Oliveira Andreotti, V . (2017). ‘The educational challenge of unraveling 
the fantasies of ontological security’, Diaspora, Indigenous, and Minority Education, vol 11: 69–79.
Stremlau, R. (2005). ‘“T o domesticate and civilize wild Indians”: Allotment and the campaign to reform 
Indian families 1875-1887’, Journal of Family History, vol 30: 265–286.
Suagee, D.B. (2012). ‘Climate crisis, renewable energy revolution, and tribal sovereignty’, in S.A. Krakoff 
and E. Rosser (eds.) Tribes, Land, and the Environment. Ashgate: Burlington, VT, 43–74.
Tauli-Corpuz, V . and Lynge, A. (2008). ‘Impact of climate change mitigation measures on Indigenous 
peoples and on their territories and lands’, Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Seventh Session, 
vol 31: 1–90.
Turner, D. (2006). This Is Not a Peace Pipe: Towards a Critical Indigenous Philosophy. University of T oronto 
Press: T oronto, ON.
U.S. Deparment of State. (1856). The Guano Islands Act, 11 Stat.  119, Enacted 18 August 1856, Codified 
at 48 U.S.C.  ch. 8 §§ 1411–1419. Available: https ://us code. house  .gov/ view. xhtml ?path =/prelim@
title48/chapter8&edition=prelim, accessed 20 May 2020.
Watkinson, M.K. (2015). Tribal Capacity for Climate Change Adaptation: Identifying the Impact of Fractionated 
Land for a Coastal Community June 8 2015. MA Dissertation, University of Washington, WA.
Whyte, K.P . (2018). ‘Indigenous science (fiction) for the anthropocene: Ancestral dystopias and fantasies of 
climate change crises’, Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space, vol 1: 224–242.
Wildcat, D.R. (2009). Red Alert! Saving the Planet With Indigenous Knowledge. Fulcrum: Golden, CO.
9 Thin Simplifications and
Practical Knowledge:
Métis

No battle—Tarutino, Borodino, or Austerlitz—takes place as those who planned
it anticipated. That is an essential condition.
—Tolstoy, War and Peace

We have repeatedly observed the natural and social failures of thin, for-
mulaic simplifications imposed through the agency of state power.
The utilitarian commercial and fiscal logic that led to geometric, mono-
cropped, same-age forests also led to severe ecological damage. Where
the formula had been applied with the greatest rigor, it eventually be-
came necessary to attempt to restore much of the forest's original di-
versity and complexity—or rather, to create a “virtual” forest that
would mimic the robustness and durability of the “prescientific” forest.

The planned “scientific city,’ laid out according to a small number
of rational principles, was experienced as a social failure by most of its
inhabitants. Paradoxically, the failure of the designed city was often
averted, as was the case in Brasilia, by practical improvisations and il-
legal acts that were entirely outside the plan. Just as the stripped-down
logic behind the scientific forest was an inadequate recipe for a healthy,
“successful” forest, so were the thin urban-planning schemata of Le
Corbusier an inadequate recipe for a satisfactory human community.

Any large social process or event will inevitably be far more com-
plex than the schemata we can devise, prospectively or retrospectively,
to map it. Lenin had every reason, as a would-be head of the vanguard
party, to emphasize military discipline and hierarchy in the revolu-
tionary project. After the October Revolution, the Bolshevik state au-
thorities had every reason, once again, to exaggerate the central, all-
seeing role of the party in bringing the revolution about. And yet we
know—and Lenin and Luxemburg knew—that the revolution had
been a close call, relying more on the improvisations, missteps, and

309

310 THE MISSING LINK

strokes of luck that Tolstoy described in War and Peace than on the pre-
cision of a parade-ground drill.

The thin simplifications of agricultural collectivization and cen-
trally planned production have met a comparable fate, whether on the
collective farms of the former Soviet Union or in the ujamaa villages of
Nyerere’s Tanzania. Here again, the schemes that did not collapse alto-
gether managed to survive thanks largely to desperate measures either
not envisaged or else expressly prohibited by the plan. Thus an infor-
mal economy developed in Russian agriculture, operating on tiny pri-
vate plots and and the “theft” of time, equipment, and commodities from
the state sector and supplying most of the dairy products, fruit, veg-
etables, and meat in the Russian diet.' Thus the forcibly resettled Tanza-
nians successfully resisted collective production and drifted back to
sites more suitable for grazing and cultivation. At times, the price of an
unyielding imposition of state simplifications on agrarian life and pro-
duction— Stalin's forced collectivization or China’s Great Leap For-
ward—was famine. As often as not, however, state officials recoiled be-
fore the abyss and came to tolerate, if not condone, a host of informal
practices that in fact underwrote the survival of the official scheme.

These rather extreme instances of massive, state-imposed social en-
gineering illustrate, I think, a larger point about formally organized so-
cial action. In each case, the necessarily thin, schematic model of social
organization and production animating the planning was inadequate
as a set of instructions for creating a successful social order. By them-
selves, the simplified rules can never generate a functioning commu-
nity, city, or economy. Formal order, to be more explicit, is always and
to some considerable degree parasitic on informal processes, which the
formal scheme does not recognize, without which it could not exist,
and which it alone cannot create or maintain.

This homely insight has long been of great tactical value to genera-
tions of trade unionists who have used it as the basis of the work-to-
rule strike. In a work-to rule action (the French call it gréve du zéle),
employees begin doing their jobs by meticulously observing every one
of the rules and regulations and performing only the duties stated in
their job descriptions. The result, fully intended in this case, is that the
work grinds to a halt, or at least to a snail's pace. The workers achieve
the practical effect of a walkout while remaining on the job and follow-
ing their instructions to the letter. Their action also illustrates pointedly
how actual work processes depend more heavily on informal under-
standings and improvisations than upon formal work rules. In the long
work-to-rule action against Caterpillar, the large equipment manufac-
turer, for example, workers reverted to following the inefficient proce

Practical Knowledge 311

dures specified by the engineers, knowing they would cost the company
valuable time and quality, rather than continuing the more expeditious
practices they had long ago devised on the job.? They were relying on
the tested assumption that working strictly by the book is necessarily
less productive than working with initiative.

This perspective on social order is less an analytical insight than a
sociological truism. It does offer, however, a valuable point of departure
for understanding why authoritarian, high-modernist schemes are po-
tentially so destructive. What they ignore—and often suppress—are
precisely the practical skills that underwrite any complex activity. My
aim in this chapter is to conceptualize these practical skills, variously
called know-how (savoir faire or arts de faire),? common sense, experi-
ence, a knack, or métis. What are these skills? How are they created,
developed, and maintained? What is their relation to formal epistemic
knowledge? I hope to show that many forms of high modernism have
replaced a valuable collaboration between these two dialects of knowl-
edge with an “imperial” scientific view, which dismisses practical know-
how as insignificant at best and as dangerous superstitions at worst.
The relation between scientific knowledge and practical knowledge is,
as we shall see, part of a political struggle for institutional hegemony by
experts and their institutions. Taylorism and scientific agriculture are,
on this reading, not just strategies of production, but also strategies of
control and appropriation.

Métis: The Contours of Practical Knowledge

Following the illuminating studies of Marcel Detienne and Jean-Pierre
Vernant, we can find in the Greek concept of métis a means of compar-
ing the forms of knowledge embedded in local experience with the
more general, abstract knowledge deployed by the state and its techni-
cal agencies.‘ Before elaborating the concept and its use, we will turn
to a brief example in order to illustrate the vernacular character of
local knowledge and ground the discussion that follows.

When the first European settlers in North America were wondering
when and how to plant New World cultivars, such as maize, they turned
to the local knowledge of their Native American neighbors for help.
They were told by Squanto, according to one legend (Chief Massasoit,
according to another), to plant corn when the oak leaves were the size
of a squirrel’s ear.) Embedded in this advice, however folkloric its ring
today, is a finely observed knowledge of the succession of natural
events in the New England spring. For Native Americans it was this or-
derly succession of, say, the skunk cabbage appearing, the willows be-

312 THE MISSING LINK

ginning to leaf, the red-wing blackbird returning, and the first hatch
of the mayfly that provided a readily observable calendar of spring,
While the timing of these events might be earlier or later in a given year
and while the pace of their succession might be more drawn out or ac-
celerated, the sequence of the events was almost never violated. As a
rule of thumb, it was a nearly foolproof formula for avoiding a frost,
We almost certainly distort Squanto’s advice, as the colonists perhaps
did, by reducing it to a single observation. Everything we know about
indigenous technical knowledge suggests that it relies on an accumu-
lation of many partly redundant signals. If other indications did not
confirm the oak-leaf formula, a prudent planter might delay further,

Compare this advice to that based on more universalistic units of
measurement. A typical local edition of The Farmer’s Almanac is a case
in point. It may suggest planting corn after the first full moon in May
or after a specified date, such as May 20. In New England, at any rate,
this advice would require considerable adjustment by latitude and al-
titude. A date that would serve for southern Connecticut would not suit
Vermont; a date that worked in the valleys would not be right for the
hills (especially the north-facing slopes); a date that worked near the
coast would not work inland. And the almanac’s date is almost certainly
a fail-safe date, since the worst thing that could happen to an almanac
publisher would be to have his or her advice lead to a crop failure. As a
result of this commercial caution, some valuable growing time may
have been lost in the interest of certainty.®

The Native American maxim, by contrast, is vernacular and local,
keyed to common features of the local ecosystem; it inquires about oak
leaves in this place, and not oak leaves in general. Despite its specificity,
it travels remarkably well. It can be deployed successfully anywhere in
temperate North America where there are oak trees and squirrels. The
precision provided by the observed sequence almost certainly gains a
few days of growing time while not appreciably raising the risk of
planting before a hard frost.

Practical knowledge like Squanto’s can, of course, be translated
into more universalistic scientific terms. A botanist might observe that
the first growth of oak leaves is made possible by rising ground and
ambient temperatures, which also assure that maize will grow and that
the probability of a killing frost is negligible. The mean soil tempera-
ture at a given depth might do just as well. Along these lines, the early
nineteenth-century mathematician, Adolph Quetelet, turned his scien-
tific eye to the mundane problem of when the lilacs would bloom in
Brussels. He concluded, after much rigorous observation, that the li-
lacs burst into bloom “when the sum of the squares of the mean daily

Practical Knowledge 313

temperature since the last frost added up to (4264C) squared.” Knowl-
edge this certainly is! Given the techniques for making the required
observations, it is probably quite accurate. But it is hardly practical.
Quetelet’s playful formula alerts us to a hallmark of most practical,
local knowledge: it is as economical and accurate as it needs to be, no
more and no less, for addressing the problem at hand.

One hesitates before introducing yet another unfamiliar term, such
as “métis,” into this discussion. In this case, however, “métis” seems to
better convey the sorts of practical skills that I have in mind than do
such plausible alternatives as “indigenous technical knowledge,” “folk
wisdom,” “practical skills,” techne, and so on.’

The concept comes to us from the ancient Greeks. Odysseus was fre-
quently praised for having métis in abundance and for using it to outwit
his enemies and make his way home. Métis is typically translated into
English as “cunning” or “cunning intelligence.” While not wrong, this
translation fails to do justice to the range of knowledge and skills repre-
sented by métis. Broadly understood, métis represents a wide array of
practical skills and acquired intelligence in responding to a constantly
changing natural and human environment. Odysseus's métis was in evi-
dence, not only in his deceiving of Circe, the Cyclops, and Polyphemus
and in binding himself to the mast to avoid the Sirens, but also in hold-
ing his men together, in repairing his ship, and in improvising tactics
to get his men out of one tight spot after another. The emphasis is both
on Odysseus’s ability to adapt successfully to a constantly shifting situ-
ation and on his capacity to understand, and hence outwit, his human
and divine adversaries.

All human activities require a considerable degree of métis, but
some activities require far more. To begin with skills that require adapt-
ing to a capricious physical environment, the acquired knowledge of
how to sail, fly a kite, fish, shear sheep, drive a car, or ride a bicycle re-
lies on the capacity for métis. Each of these skills requires hand-eye co-
ordination that comes with practice and a capacity to “read” the waves,
the wind, or the road and to make the appropriate adjustments. One
powerful indication that they all require métis is that they are excep-
tionally difficult to teach apart from engaging in the activity itself. One
might imagine trying to write down explicit instructions on how to ride
a bicycle, but one can scarcely imagine that such instructions would en-
able a novice to ride a bicycle on the first try. The maxim “Practice
makes perfect” was devised for such activities as this, inasmuch as the
continual, nearly imperceptible adjustments necessary for riding a bi-
cycle are best learned by having to make them. Only through an ac-
quired “feel” for balanced motion do the required adjustments become

314 THE MISSING LINK

automatic.’ No wonder that most crafts and trades requiring a touch
or feel for implements and materials have traditionally been taught by
long apprenticeships to master craftsmen.

There is no doubt that some individuals seem to get the hang of a
particular skill and master it more quickly than most other people,
But beyond this ineffable difference (which often spells the difference
between competence and genius), riding a bike, sailing, fishing, shear-
ing sheep, and so on can be learned through practice. Since every road,
wind, stream, and sheep is different and continually changing, the best
practitioner, like Odysseus, will have had experience under many differ-
ent conditions. If your life depended on your ship coming through rough
weather, you would surely prefer a successful captain with long experi-
ence to, say, a brilliant physicist who had analyzed the natural laws of
sailing but who had never actually sailed a vessel.

Those specialists who deal with emergencies and disasters are also
exemplary of métis. Firefighters, rescue squads, paramedics, mine-
disaster teams, doctors in hospital emergency rooms, crews that repair
downed electrical lines, teams that extinguish fires in oil fields, and, as
we shall see, farmers and pastoralists in precarious environments must
respond quickly and decisively to limit damage and save lives. Although
there are rules of thumb that can be and are taught, each fire or acci-
dent is unique, and half the battle is knowing which rules of thumb to
apply in which order and when to throw the book away and improvise.

Red Adair’s team, which has been hired worldwide to cap well-
head fires, was a striking and diagnostic case. Before the Gulf War of
1990, his was the only team with any appreciable “clinical” experience,
and he could set his own price. Each fire presented new problems and
required an inspired mixture of experience and improvisation. We can
imagine, at almost opposite ends of a spectrum, Adair on one hand and
a minor clerk performing highly repetitive steps on the other. Adair’s
job cannot, by definition, be reduced to a routine. He must begin with
the unpredictable—an accident, a fire—and then devise the techniques
and equipment (from an existing repertoire, to be sure, but one in-
vented largely by him) required to extinguish that fire and cap that
well.!° The clerk, by contrast, deals with a predictable, routinized en-
vironment that can often be ordered in advance and down to the small-
est detail. Adair cannot simplify his environment in order to apply a
cookie-cutter solution.

The examples thus far introduced have been mostly concerned with
the relation between people and their physical environment. But métis
equally applies to human interaction. Think of the complex physical
activities that require constant adjustment to the movement, values,

Practical Knowledge 315

desires, or gestures of others. Boxing, wrestling, and fencing require
instant, quasi-automatic responses to an opponent's moves, which can
be learned only through long practice of the activity itself. Here the el-
ement of deception enters as well. The successful boxer will learn to
feint a move in order to provoke a response of which he can then take
advantage. If we move from physical contests to such cooperative ac-
tivities as dancing, music, or lovemaking, a similar practiced respon-
siveness born of experience is essential. Many sports combine both the
cooperative and the competitive aspects of métis. A soccer player must
learn not only the moves of his or her teammates but also which team
moves and fakes will deceive their opponents. Such skills, it is impor-
tant to note, are both generic and particular; while each player may be
more or less skilled at different facets of the game, each team has its
particular combination of skills, its “chemistry,” and each contest with
an opposing team represents a challenge that is in some ways unique.!!

On a much bigger, higher-stakes canvas, war diplomacy and poli-
tics more generally are métis-laden skills. The successful practitioner,
in each case, tries to shape the behavior of partners and opponents to
his own ends. Unlike the sailor, who can adjust to the wind and the
waves but not influence them directly, the general and the politician
are in constant interaction with their counterparts, each of whom is
trying to outfox the other. Adapting quickly and well to unpredictable
events—both natural events, such as the weather, and human events,
such as the enemy’s move—and making the best out of limited re-
sources are the kinds of skills that are hard to teach as cut-and-dried
disciplines.

The necessarily implicit, experiential nature of métis seems central.
Asimple experiment in implicit learning conducted by the philosopher
Charles Peirce may help to convey something of the process. Peirce had
people lift two weights and judge which of the two was heavier. At first,
their discrimination was rather crude. But as they practiced for long
periods, they became able to distinguish accurately quite minute differ-
ences in weight. They could not pinpoint what it was that they sensed
or felt, but their actual capacity to discriminate grew enormously. Peirce
took the results as evidence for a kind of subliminal communication
via “faint sensations” between people. For our purposes, however, it il-
lustrates a rudimentary kind of knowledge that can be acquired only
by practice and that all but defies being communicated in written or
oral form apart from actual practice.!

Surveying the range of examples that we have touched on, we can
venture some preliminary generalizations about the nature of métis
and about where it is relevant. Métis is most applicable to broadly sim-

316 THE MISSING LINK

ilar but never precisely identical situations requiring a quick and prac-
ticed adaptation that becomes almost second nature to the practitioner,
The skills of métis may well involve rules of thumb, but such rules are
largely acquired through practice (often in formal apprenticeship) and
a developed feel or knack for strategy. Métis resists simplification into
deductive principles which can successfully be transmitted through
book learning, because the environments in which it is exercised are so
complex and nonrepeatable that formal procedures of rational deci-
sion making are impossible to apply. In a sense, métis lies in that large
space between the realm of genius, to which no formula can apply, and
the realm of codified knowledge, which can be learned by rote.

The Art of the Locality

Why are the rules of thumb that can be derived from any skilled
craft still woefully inadequate to its practice? Artists or cooks, Michael
Oakeshott has noted, may in fact write about their art and try to boil it
down to technical knowledge, but what they write represents not much
of what they know but rather only that small part of their knowledge
that can be reduced to exposition. Knowing a craft's shorthand rules is
a very long way from its accomplished performance: “These rules and
principles are mere abridgements of the activity itself; they do not exist
in advance of the activity, they cannot properly be said to govern it and
they cannot provide the impetus of the activity. A complete mastery of
the principles may exist alongside a complete inability to pursue the
activity to which they refer, for the pursuit of the activity does not con-
sist in the application of these principles; and even if it did, the knowl-
edge of how to apply them (the knowledge of actually pursuing the ac-
tivity) is not given in a knowledge of them.”

Knowing how and when to apply the rules of thumb in a concrete
situation is the essence of métis. The subtleties of application are im-
portant precisely because métis is most valuable in settings that are
mutable, indeterminant (some facts are unknown), and particular.!*
Although we shall return to the question of indeterminacy and change,
here I want to explore further the localness and particularity of métis.

In seamanship, the difference between the more general knowledge
of navigation and the more particular knowledge of piloting is instruc-
tive. When a large freighter or passenger liner approaches a major port,
the captain typically turns the control of his vessel over to a local pilot,
who brings it into the harbor and to its berth. The same procedure is
followed when the ship leaves its berth until it is safely out into the sea-
lanes. This sensible procedure, designed to avoid accidents, reflects

Practical Knowledge 317

the fact that navigation on the open sea (a more “abstract” space) is the
more general skill, while piloting a ship through traffic in a particular
port is a highly contextual skill. We might call the art of piloting a “local
and situated knowledge.” What the pilot knows are local tides and cur-
rents along the coast and estuaries, the unique features of local wind
and wave patterns, shifting sandbars, unmarked reefs, seasonal changes
in microcurrents, local traffic conditions, the daily vagaries of wind pat-
terns off headlands and along straits, how to pilot in these waters at
night, not to mention how to bring many different ships safely to berth
under variable conditions.'S Such knowledge is particular, by defini-
tion; it can be acquired only by local practice and experience. Like a
bird or an insect that has adapted brilliantly to a narrow ecological
niche, the pilot knows one harbor. Much of his knowledge would be ir-
relevant if he were suddenly transposed to a different port.'* Despite
the rather narrow context of this knowledge, it is agreed by captains,
harbormasters, and, not least, those who insure maritime commerce
against losses that the pilot's knowledge of a particular port must pre-
vail. The pilot’s experience is locally superior to the general rules of
navigation.

Mark Twain’s classic Life on the Mississippi reflects at great length
on the knowledge acquired by riverboat pilots. Part of that knowledge
consists of rules of thumb about surface features that may signal shal-
lows, currents, or other navigational hazards. Much of it, however, con-
sists of a quite specific familiarity with their particular stretch of the
Mississippi at different seasons and water levels —knowledge that could
have been gained in that particular place only through experience. Al-
though there is something that might properly be called a knowledge
of rivers in general, it is a quite thin and unsatisfactory knowledge when
it comes to making a particular trip on a particular river. A native pilot
is no less necessary on a given river than a native tracker for a given
jungle or a local guide in Bruges or in the medina of an ancient Arab
city.

The practice and experience reflected in métis is almost always
local. Thus a guide on mountain climbing may be best at Zermatt,
which she has scaled often; an airplane pilot best on Boeing 747s, on
which he was trained; and the orthopedic surgeon best at knees, where
her surgical experience has given her a certain expertise. It is not en-
tirely clear how much of these experts’ métis would be transferable if
they were suddenly shifted to Mont Blanc, DC3s, and hands.

Every instance of the application of a given skill will require
specific adjustments for local conditions. For a weaver, each new sup-
ply of yarn or thread handles differently. For a potter, a new supply of

318 THE MISSING LINK

clay “works” differently. Long experience with different materials will
have the effect of making such adjustments quasi-automatic. The speci-
ficity of knowledge goes even deeper, in the sense that each loom or
potter's wheel has its own distinctive qualities, which an artisan comes
to know and appreciate (or work around). Every general knowledge
that is actually applied, then, requires some imaginative translation. A
consummate knowledge of looms in general does not translate directly
into the successful operation of this particular loom with its peculiari-
ties of design, use, woods, and repairs. To speak of the art of one loom,
the art of one river, the art of one tractor, or the art of one automobile
is not preposterous; it is to point to the size and importance of the gap
between general knowledge and situated knowledge.

We might reasonably think of situated, local knowledge as being
partisan knowledge as opposed to generic knowledge. That is, the holder
of such knowledge typically has a passionate interest in a particular out-
come. An insurer of commercial shipping for a large, highly capital-
ized maritime firm can afford to rely on probability distributions for
accidents. But for a sailor or captain hoping for a safe voyage, it is the
outcome of the single event, a single trip, that matters. Métis is the
ability and experience necessary to influence the outcome—to im-
prove the odds— in a particular instance.

The state simplifications and utopian schemes we have examined in
earlier chapters all concern activities that are carried out in spatially
and temporally unique settings. While something can indeed be said
about forestry, revolution, urban planning, agriculture, and rural set-
tlement in general, this will take us only so far in understanding this
forest, this revolution, this farm. All farming takes place in a unique
space (fields, soil, crops) and at a unique time (weather pattern, sea-
son, cycle in pest populations) and for unique ends (this family with its
needs and tastes). A mechanical application of generic rules that ig-
nores these particularities is an invitation to practical failure, social
disillusionment, or most likely both. The generic formula does not and
cannot supply the local knowledge that will allow a successful transla-
tion of the necessarily crude general understandings to successful, nu-
anced, local applications. The more general the rules, the more they
require in the way of translation if they are to be locally successful.
Nor is it simply a matter of the captain or navigator realizing at what
point his rules of thumb are inferior to the intimate local knowledge of
the pilot. Rather, it is a matter of recognizing that the rules of thumb
themselves are largely a codification derived from the actual practices
of sailing and piloting.

One last analogy may help to clarify the relationship between gen-

Practical Knowledge 319

eral rules of thumb and métis. Métis is not merely the specification of
local values (such as the local mean temperature and rainfall) made in
order to successfully apply a generic formula to a local case. Taking lan-
guage as a parallel, I believe that the rule of thumb is akin to formal
grammar, whereas métis is more like actual speech. Métis is no more de-
rivative of general rules than speech is derivative of grammar. Speech
develops from the cradle by imitation, use, trial and error. Learning a
mother tongue is a stochastic process—a process of successive, self-
correcting approximations. We do not begin by learning the alphabet,
individual words, parts of speech, and rules of grammar and then try-
ing to use them all in order to produce a grammatically correct sen-
tence. Moreover, as Oakeshott indicates, a knowledge of the rules of
speech by themselves is compatible with a complete inability to speak
intelligible sentences. The assertion that the rules of grammar are de-
rivative of the practice of actual speech is nearer to the truth. Modern
language training that aims at competence in speaking recognizes this
and begins with simple speech and rote repetition in order to imprint
pattern and accent while leaving the rules of grammar implicit, or else
introducing them later as a way of codifying and summarizing practi-
cal mastery.

Like language, the métis or local knowledge necessary to the suc-
cessful practice of farming or pastoralism is probably best learned by
daily practice and experience. Like serving a long apprenticeship,
growing up in a household where that craft is continually practiced
often represents the most satisfactory preparation for its exercise. This
kind of socialization to a trade may favor the conservation of skills
rather than daring innovation. But any formula that excludes or sup-
presses the experience, knowledge, and adaptability of métis risks inco-
herence and failure; learning to speak coherent sentences involves far
more than merely learning the rules of grammar.

The Relation with Episteme and Techne

For the Greeks and particularly for Plato, episteme and techne rep-
resented knowledge of an order completely different from métis.!’
Technical knowledge, or techne, could be expressed precisely and com-
prehensively in the form of hard-and-fast rules (not rules of thumb),
principles, and propositions. At its most rigorous, techne is based on
logical deduction from self-evident first principles. As an ideal type, it
radically differs from métis in terms of how it is organized, how it is
codified and taught, how it is modified, and the analytical precision it
exhibits.

320 THE MISSING LINK

Where métis is contextual and particular, techne is universal. In the
logic of mathematics, ten multiplied by ten equals one hundred every-
where and forever; in Euclidean geometry, a right angle represents
ninety degrees of a circle; in the conventions of physics, the freezing
point of water is always zero degrees centigrade.'* Techne is settled
knowledge; Aristotle wrote that techne “came into being when from
many notions gained from experience, a universal judgement about a
group of similar things arises.’!° The universality of techne arises from
the fact that it is organized analytically into small, explicit, logical steps
and is both decomposable and verifiable. This universality means that
knowledge in the form of techne can be taught more or less completely
as a formal discipline. The rules of techne provide for theoretical knowl-
edge that may or may not have practical applications. Finally, techne is
characterized by impersonal, often quantitative precision and a concern
with explanation and verification, whereas métis is concerned with per-
sonal skill, or “touch,” and practical results.

If the description of techne as an ideal or typical system of knowl-
edge resembles the self-image of modern science, that is no accident.
The actual practice of science, however, is something else again.?° The
rules of techne are the specification of how knowledge is to be codi-
fied, expressed, and verified, once it has been discovered. No rules of
techne or episteme can explain scientific invention and insight. Dis-
covering a mathematical theorem requires genius and perhaps métis;
the proof of the theorem, however, must follow the tenets of techne.?!
Thus the systematic and impersonal rules of techne facilitate the pro-
duction of knowledge that can be readily assembled, comprehensively
documented, and formally taught, but they cannot by themselves add to
that knowledge or explain how it came into being.??

Techne is characteristic, above all, of self-contained systems of rea-
soning in which the findings may be logically derived from the initial
assumptions. To the degree that the form of knowledge satisfies these
conditions, to that degree is it impersonal, universal, and completely im-
pervious to context. But the context of métis, as Detienne and Vernant
emphasize, is characteristically “situations which are transient, shift-
ing, disconcerting and ambiguous, situations which do not lend them-
selves to precise measurement, exact calculation, or rigorous logic.”?3
Nussbaum shows convincingly how Plato attempted, especially in the
Republic, to transform the realm of love—a realm that almost by defi-
nition is one of contingency, desire, and impulse—into a realm of
techne or episteme.* Plato regarded mundane love as subject to the
lower appetites, and he hoped to purge it of these base instincts so that
it could more closely resemble the philosopher's pure search for truth.

in |

Practical Knowledge 321

The superiority of pure reasoning, especially scientific and mathe-
matical logic, lay in the fact that it was “pure of pain, maximally sta-
ble, and directed at the truth.” The objects of such reasoning “are eter-
nally what they are regardless of what human beings do and say.”*5
What one loved, or should love, Plato claimed, was not the beloved him-
self but rather the pure forms of unalloyed beauty reflected in the
beloved.” Only in this way could love remain straight and rational, free
of the appetites.

The spheres of human endeavor that are freest of contingency,
guesswork, context, desire, and personal experience—and thus free of
métis—hence came to be perceived as man’s highest pursuits. They are
the philosopher’s work. One can see why, on the strength of such cri-
teria, Euclidean geometry, mathematics, some self-contained forms of
analytical philosophy, and perhaps music are considered to be among
the purest of pursuits.?” Unlike the natural sciences and concrete ex-
periments, these disciplines exist as realms of pure thought, untouched
by the contingencies of the material world. They begin in the mind or
on a blank sheet of paper. The Pythagorean theorem, a? + b? = c?, is
true for all right triangles everywhere and forever.

A recurrent theme of Western philosophy and science, including so-
cial science, has been the attempt to reformulate systems of knowledge
in order to bracket uncertainty and thereby permit the kind of logical
deductive rigor possessed by Euclidean geometry.”® In the natural sci-
ences, the results have been revolutionary. Where philosophy and the
human sciences are concerned, the efforts have been just as persistent
but the results far more ambiguous. Descartes's famous episteme “I
think, therefore I am” mimicked the first step in a mathematical proof
and was an “answer to the disorder that threatened to undo society.”””
The aim of Jeremy Bentham and the utilitarians was, through their
calculus of pleasure and pain (hedonism), to reduce the study of ethics
to a pure natural science, to an examination of “every circumstance by
which an individual can be influenced, being remarked and invento-
ried, nothing . . . left to chance, caprice, or unguided discretion, every-
thing being surveyed and set down in dimension, number, weight, and
measure.”*°

Even chance (tuche) itself, which techne was designed to master,
was eventually, thanks to statistics and probability theory, transformed
into a singular fact that might enter the formulas of techne. Risk, pro-
viding it could be assigned a known probability, became a fact like any
other, whereas uncertainty (where the underlying probabilities are not
known) still lay outside techne’s reach.3! The intellectual “career” of
risk and uncertainty is indicative of many fields of inquiry in which the

322 THE MISSING LINK

realm of analysis was reformulated and narrowed to exclude elements
that could not be quantified and measured but could only be judged.
Better put, techniques were devised to isolate and domesticate those
aspects of key variables that might be expressed in numbers (a nation’s
wealth by gross national product, public opinion by poll numbers, val-
ues by psychological inventories). Neoclassical economics, for exam-
ple, has undergone a transformation along these lines. Consumer pref-
erences are first taken as a given and then counted, in order to bracket
taste as a major source of uncertainty. Invention and entrepreneurial ac-
tivity are treated as exogenous and cast outside the perimeter of the
discipline as too intractable to submit to measurement and prediction.*?
The discipline has incorporated calculable risk while exiling those top-
ics where genuine uncertainty prevails (ecological dangers, shifts in
taste).23 As Stephen Marglin shows, “the emphasis on self-interest, calcu-
lation, and maximization in economics” are classical examples of “self-
evident postulates” and reflect “more an ideological commitment to the
superiority of episteme than a serious attempt to unravel the complex-
ities and mysteries of human motivation and behavior.”*4

The logic of such reformulations is analogous to the experimental
practice and self-imposed boundaries of modern scientific agriculture.
By constricting its field of inquiry, it gained enormously in precision
and scientific power at the possible expense of irrelevance or unpleas-
ant surprises from beyond its artificial perimeters.*> Techne is most suit-
able to activities “that have a singular end or goal, an end that is speci-
fiable apart from the activity itself, and one susceptible to quantitative
measurement.” Thus the problem most successfully addressed by sci-
entific agriculture is how to grow the largest number of bushels of a
crop at the least cost per acre, as revealed through one-variable-at-a-
time trials conducted on experimental plots. Issues of farming life and
community, family needs, long-term soil structure, ecological diversity,
and sustainability are either difficult to incorporate or excluded alto-
gether. Formulas of efficiency, production functions, and rational ac-
tion are specifiable only when the ends sought are simple, sharply
defined, and hence measurable.

The problem, as Aristotle recognized, is that certain practical choices
cannot, “even in principle, be adequately and completely captured in a
system of universal rules.”3” He singled out navigation and medicine as
two activities in which the practical wisdom of long experience is in-
dispensable to superior performance. They were métis-laden activities
in which responsiveness, improvisation, and skillful, successive approx-
imations were required. If Plato can be credited, Socrates deliberately

refrained from writing down his teachings, because he believed that the ~

Practical Knowledge 323

activity of philosophy belonged more to métis than to episteme or
techne. A written text, even if it takes the form of a philosophical dia-
logue, is a cut-and-dried set of codified rules. An oral dialogue, by
contrast, is alive and responsive to the mutuality of the participants,
reaching a destination that cannot be specified in advance. Socrates
evidently believed that the interaction between teacher and students
that we now call the Socratic method, and not the resulting text, is
philosophy.38

Practical Knowledge Versus Scientific Explanation

Only by grasping the potential achievement and range of métis is it
possible to appreciate the valuable knowledge that high-modernist
schemes deprive themselves of when they simply impose their plans.
One major reason why métis is denigrated, particularly in the hege-
monic imperium of scientific knowledge, is that its “findings” are prac-
tical, opportune, and contextual rather than integrated into the gen-
eral conventions of scientific discourse.

We have seen the idiosyncracies of métis at work in the historical
vernaculars of measurement of area, weight, and volume. The aim was
always to achieve a local purpose or to express an important local fea-
ture (such as “a farm of two cows”) rather than to accommodate some
universal unit of measurement. Like Squanto’s maxim, such vernacu-
lar measures apparently often conveyed more information than an ab-
stract measure could. They certainly conveyed information that was
more locally relevant. It was just this local, practical index, which var-
ied from place to place, that ensured that métis would be confusing, in-
coherent, and unassimilable for purposes of statecraft.

The classification of flora follows much the same logic among in-
digenous people. What matters is local use and value. Thus the categor-
ies into which various plants are sorted follow a logic of practical use:
good for making soup, good for making twine, helpful in healing cuts,
effective for settling an upset stomach, poisonous for cattle, useful for
weaving our cloth, favored by rabbits as food, good for making fences,
and so on. This knowledge is never static, however; it is constantly being
expanded through practical experimentation. And the categories into
which floral reality is divided are clearly not the occasionally invisible
Linnaean botanical categories favored by scientific researchers.2?

The litmus test for métis is practical success. Did the navigator make
the trip safely? Did Odysseus's stratagems outwit the Cyclops? Did the
poultice cure the boil? Was the farmer's harvest abundant? If a tech-
nique works effectively and repeatedly for the purpose intended, the

324 THE MISSING LINK

practitioners of métis do not pause long to ask why and how it worked,
to define the precise mechanism of cause and effect. Their intent is not
to contribute to a wider body of knowledge but to solve the concrete
problems they face. This does not mean that the practitioners of métis
do not invent new solutions. They most decidedly do. Until quite re-
cently virtually all the improvements in agriculture have come from the
field rather than from industry or science. What it does mean, however,
is that the innovations of métis will typically represent a recombination
(bricolage, to use Lévi-Strauss's term)” of existing elements; farmers did
not invent the tractor to solve their problems of traction power.*! By the
same token, the bricolage of practical knowledge has often produced
complex techniques—such as polycropping and soil-building strate-
gies—that work admirably but that science has not (yet?) understood.

The power of practical knowledge depends on an exceptionally
close and astute observation of the environment. It should by now be
rather obvious why traditional cultivators like Squanto are such con-
summate observers of their environment, but the reasons bear repeat-
ing in the context of a comparison with scientific knowledge. First, these
cultivators have a vital, direct stake in the results of close observation.
Unlike the research scientist or extension agent who does not have to
take her own advice, the peasant is the immediate consumer of his
own conclusions. Unlike the typical modern-day farmer, the peasant
has no outside experts to rely on beyond his experienced neighbors; he
must make decisions based on what he knows.

Second, the poverty or marginal economic status of many of these
cultivators is itself, 1 would argue, a powerful impetus to careful obser-
vation and experimentation. Consider the hypothetical case of two
fishermen, both of whom must make their living from a river. One
fisherman lives by a river where the catch is stable and abundant. The
other lives by a river where the catch is variable and sparse, affording
only a bare and precarious subsistence. The poorer of the two will
clearly have an immediate, life-and-death interest in devising new
fishing techniques, in observing closely the habits of fish, in the careful
siting of traps and weirs, in the timing and signs of seasonal runs of
different species, and so forth.

Nor should we forget that the peasant cultivator or pastoralist lives
year in and year out in the field of observation. He or she will likely
know things that neither an absentee cultivator nor a research scientist
would ever notice.‘ Finally, as mentioned in the previous chapter, such
a cultivator is always a member of a community that serves as a living,
oral reference library for observations, practices, and experiments—a
body of knowledge that an individual could never amass alone.

Practical Knowledge 325

The experimental temper of “prescientific” peoples, often impelled
by mortal threats, resulted in many important, efficacious discoveries.
South American Indians discovered that chewing the bark of the cin-
chona tree was an effective remedy for malaria, without knowing that
its active ingredient was quinine or why it worked. Westerners knew
that certain foods consumed in the early spring, such as rhubarb, could
relieve the symptoms of wintertime scurvy, without knowing anything
about Vitamin C. The mold from certain breads was used to stem infec-
tions long before the isolation of penicillin.* According to Anil Gupta,
roughly three-quarters of the modern pharmacopoeia are derivatives
of traditionally known medicines.** Even in the absence of remedies,
people often knew what measures would lessen their chances of con-
tracting a dreaded contagious disease. The Londoners in Daniel Defoe’s
Journal of the Plague Year knew that moving to the country or, failing
that, sealing oneself up in one’s rooms vastly improved one’s chances of
surviving the bubonic plague of 1665.45 Knowing, as we now do, that
the vectors of the plague were the fleas carried by rats, we can appre-
ciate why these strategies often worked, but Defoe’s contemporaries hit
on these effective solutions even though they thought that the plague
was caused by vapors.

A most striking illustration of practice preceding science is the
widespread use of variolation to check the spread of smallpox long be-
fore Sir William Jenner's heralded development of vaccination in 1798.
The story, which Frédérique Apffel Marglin analyzes in impressive de-
tail, is valuable because it demonstrates how purely métis skills led to
a form of inoculation that mimicked or presaged what is justifiably
seen as a great milestone in scientific medicine. Let me make it clear
that the last thing I intend here is a defense of traditional medicine vis-
a-vis modern medical research and experimental method.‘” What this
account does highlight, however, is how frequently local knowledge,
trial and error, or what we might more generously call the stochastic
method have produced practical solutions without benefit of scientific
method.

By at least the sixteenth century, the technique of variolation was
widely practiced in India, the Middle East, Europe, and China. The
practice consisted of using human smallpox matter, scratched into the
skin or inhaled, which gave the recipient a mild, rarely fatal case of
smallpox. “Fresh” smallpox matter—from the pustules or scabs of
someone with an active infection contracted in the usual way—was
never used. The inoculation was typically made with attenuated matter
saved from those who had had mild cases during last year’s epidemic
or with matter taken from the pustules of those who had been inocu-

326 THE MISSING LINK

lated the previous year. Dosage could be regulated according to the
size and age of the patient.

The principle behind variolation, the same principle that forms the
basis of homeopathy, reflected a much older practice. Inoculation in
one form or another was widely practiced well before the rise of mod-
ern medicine. In India, variolation was carried out by ritual specialists
and was thoroughly integrated with the worship of the goddess
Sithala.*8 In other societies, its cultural setting was no doubt different,
although the actual procedures were remarkably parallel.

Jenner's discovery of vaccination using cowpox matter was there-
fore not entirely novel. A young girl had told him that she was pro-
tected against smallpox because she had already had cowpox. Jenner,
following this lead, inoculated his own children with cowpox matter
and observed that they showed no reaction to a subsequent smallpox
vaccination. Vaccination was, of course, a great advance over variola-
tion. Because it used live smallpox matter, variolation induced a mild
but active case that was contagious, and 1 to 3 percent of those so
treated died from the treatment, a ratio that nonetheless compared fa-
vorably with the one or two in six who perished in an epidemic. Jen-
ner’s technique used killed virus, thus avoiding contagion, and his vac-
cination had a remarkably low iatrogenic rate: only one in a thousand
died of the vaccination itself. His achievement is rightly celebrated,
but it is important to recognize that “Jennerian vaccination was not
an abrupt break with the past, but the direct descendant and heir of
inoculation.”

Variolation, though hardly to be preferred to vaccination, was an
impressive accomplishment of practical prescientific medicine. The
principle of inoculation had long been grasped, and, one imagines, a
great many practitioners in affected communities were trying to de-
velop a successful technique. Once the efficacy of a new treatment was
established, the news must have traveled faster than any epidemic and
quickly displaced less successful preventative measures. There is no
magic here. The ingredients of such practical knowledge are simple: a
pressing need (in this case, a matter literally of life and death), a few
promising leads that worked in analogous contexts (inoculation), a
vast army of freelance experimenters willing to try almost anything,”
time to “simmer” (as the experimenters and their clients observed the
results of various stratagems through successive epidemics), and the
sharing (through chains of communication) of the experimental re-
sults. As long as it didn’t require an electron microscope, it would in
fact be surprising if such a combination of passionate interest, close
observation, large numbers of amateur specialists trying different pos-

Practical Knowledge 327

sibilities, and the time necessary for trial and error did not produce
many novel solutions to practical problems. The variolators before
Jenner were not unlike the polycropping cultivators described by Paul
Richards. They had devised, not just stumbled upon, something that
worked, without quite knowing exactly why it worked. While this in-
creased their risk of drawing false inferences from what they saw, it
did not diminish the practical achievements of their bricolage.

Métis, with the premium it places on practical knowledge, experi-
ence, and stochastic reasoning, is of course not merely the now-super-
seded precursor of scientific knowledge. It is the mode of reasoning
most appropriate to complex material and social tasks where the un-
certainties are so daunting that we must trust our (experienced) intu-
ition and feel our way. Albert Howard's description of water manage-
ment in Japan offers an instructive example: “Erosion control in Japan
is like a game of chess. The forest engineer, after studying his eroding
valley, makes his first move, locating and building one or more check
dams. He waits to see what Nature's response is. This determines the
forest engineer’s next move, which may be another dam or two, an in-
crease in the former dam, or the construction of side retaining walls.
Another pause for observation, the next move is made, and so on, until
erosion is checkmated. The operations of natural forces, such as sedi-
mentation and re-vegetation, are guided and used to the best advan-
tage to keep down costs and to obtain practical results. No more is at-
tempted than Nature has already done in the region.”>! The engineer in
Howard's account recognizes implicitly that he is dealing with “an art
of one valley.’ Each prudent, small step, based on prior experience,
yields new and not completely predictable effects that become the point
of departure for the next step. Virtually any complex task involving
many variables whose values and interactions cannot be accurately
forecast belongs to this genre: building a house, repairing a car, per-
fecting a new jet engine, surgically repairing a knee, or farming a plot
of land.*? Where the interactions involve not just the material environ-
ment but social interaction as well—building and peopling new vil-
lages or cities, organizing a revolutionary seizure of power, or collec-
tivizing agriculture—the mind boggles at the multitude of interactions
and uncertainties (as distinct from calculable risks).

More than thirty-five years ago, in recognition of the refractory
complexity of ambitious social policy, Charles Lindblom coined the
memorable expression “the science of muddling through.”®3 The phrase
was meant to capture the spirit of a practical approach to large-scale
policy problems that could not be completely understood, let alone
comprehensively addressed. Models of public administration, Lind-

328 THE MISSING LINK

blom complained, implicitly assumed a synoptic mastery of a policy
initiative, when in practice, knowledge was both limited and frag-
mentary, and means could never be neatly separated from goals. His
characterization of actual policy practice emphasized a piecemeal ap-
proach of limited comparisons, a sequence of trials and errors fol-
lowed by revised trials, reliance on past experience, and “disjointed in-
crementalism.”*4 Albert Hirschman has made the same point, rather
more metaphorically, by comparing social policy to house building:
“The architect of social change can never have a reliable blueprint.
Not only is each house he builds different from any other that was built
before, but it necessarily uses new construction materials and even ex-
periments with untested principles of stress and structure. Therefore
what can be most usefully conveyed by the builders of one house is an
understanding of the experience that made it at all possible to build
under these trying circumstances.”5>

Taken together, Lindblom’s and Hirschman's positions amount to a
well-reasoned strategic retreat from the ambition to comprehensive,
rational planning. If we can make allowances for the social-science
jargon, the concepts behind such terms as “bounded rationality” (rather
than “synoptic mastery”) and “satisficing” (rather than “maximizing”),
terms invented to describe a world working by educated guesswork
and rules of thumb, sound very much like métis.

Learning Beyond the Book

A step-by-step “muddling through” approach would seem to be the
only prudent course in a field like erosion management or public pol-
icy implementation, where surprises are all but guaranteed. The fact
that in these cases the level of uncertainty and hence of potential dis-
aster can be reduced by breaking down the process into more man-
ageable steps does not imply that any novice could then take charge.
On the contrary, only someone with wide experience will be able to in-
terpret the results of and reactions to an initial step in order to deter-
mine the next step. One would want hydrologists and policy managers
who had been surprised many times and have had many successes be-
hind them. Their repertoire of responses would be larger, their judg-
ment in reading the environment surer, their sense of what surprises
might await them more accurate. Once again, some of their compe-
tence could be interpreted and taught, but much of it would remain
implicit—a sixth sense that comes with long practice. At the risk of try-
ing to pinpoint the ineffable, I want to suggest how important such
knowledge is and how difficult it is to translate it into codified form.**

"

Practical Knowledge 329

Métis knowledge is often so implicit and automatic that its bearer is
at a loss to explain it.*’ A staple of early medical training, I have been
told, is the story of a physician who, at the turn of the century, had a
spectacularly high success rate in diagnosing syphilis in its early stages.
Laboratory tests confirmed his diagnoses, but he himself did not know
precisely what it was that he detected in the physical exams that led
him to his conclusions. Intrigued by his success, hospital administrators
asked two other doctors to closely observe his examination of patients
over several weeks and to see if they could spot what he was picking
up. At long last, they and the doctor realized that he was unconsciously
registering the patients’ slight eye tremor. The eye tremor then became
a universally recognized symptom of syphilis. Although this insight
could be codified, what is instructive here is that it could have been
achieved only through close observation and long clinical experience
and that, even before then, it could have been known subliminally.

Any experienced practitioner of a skill or craft will develop a large
repertoire of moves, visual judgments, a sense of touch, or a discrimi-
nating gestalt for assessing the work as well as a range of accurate in-
tuitions born of experience that defy being communicated apart from
practice. A few brief examples will help to convey the subtlety and nu-
ance of this knowledge. In Indonesia, older Bugis sea captains, sound
asleep below decks, will awaken the moment there is a change in di-
rection, weather, current, or some combination of the three. As the
ocean's waves change amplitude or begin striking the ship from a dif-
ferent direction, a captain immediately senses the change through the
resulting slight alterations in the roll and pitch of the ship.

In the days when a case of diphtheria in town was still an occasion
for quarantining the patient at home, a doctor was taking a young med-
ical student along with him on his rounds. When they had been admit-
ted to the front hall of a quarantined house but before they had seen
the patient, the older man paused and said, “Stop. Smell the odor!
Never forget this smell; this is the smell of a house with diphtheria.”5*
Another doctor once told me that, after seeing thousands of infants at a
busy clinic, he believed that he could tell with a high degree of accu-
racy, just by looking, whether an infant was seriously ill and needed im-
mediate attention. He couldn't quite put his finger on the exact visual
cue that informed his judgment, but he supposed that it was some
combination of complexion, the expression of the eyes, body tone, and
animation. Albert Howard once again makes a persuasive case for the
“practiced eye”: “An experienced farmer can tell the health of the soil
and the quality of the humus by the plants—their vigor, their growth,
the profuse roots, the ‘glow’ of health. . . . The same is true for the

330 THE MISSING LINK

health of animals on good land.” Indeed, he continues, “it is not neces-
sary to weigh or measure them. A glance on the part of the successful
grazier, or a butcher accustomed to deal with high class animals, is
sufficient to tell him whether all is well or whether there is something
wrong with the soil or the management of the animals, or both.”

What is the status of such insight or intuition? We might call these
skills the “tricks of the trade” (in the nondeceptive sense) that most
“crafty” practitioners acquire.® Notice that virtually all the experienced
judgments described in these anecdotes could be verified by tests and
measurements. Diphtheria can be detected in the laboratory, a child’s
anemia can be verified by blood tests, and the Bugis sea captain can go
on deck to confirm the shift in the wind. It is doubtless reassuring to
those who have both the intuition and access to formal measurement
to know that their judgment can be checked. But the epistemic alter-
native to métis is far slower, more laborious, more capital intensive,
and not always decisive. When rapid judgments of high (not perfect)
accuracy are called for, when it is important to interpret early signs that
things are going well or poorly, then there is no substitute for métis. In
the case of the experienced doctor, in fact, it is métis that informs a de-
cision about whether tests are needed and, if so, which tests.

Even the part of métis that can be conveyed by rules of thumb is the
codification of practical experience. The boiling down of maple sap
into syrup is a tricky business. If one goes too far, the sap will boil over.
The stopping point can be determined by a thermometer or by a hy-
drometer (which indicates specific gravity). But those with experience
look for the mass of small bubbles that forms on the surface of the sap
just before it begins to boil over—a visual rule of thumb that is far eas-
ier to use. Achieving the insight, however, requires that, at least once,
the syrup maker make a mistake and go too far. Chinese recipes, it has
always amused me, often contain the following instruction: “Heat the
oil until it is almost smoking.” The recipes assume that the cook has
made enough mistakes to know what oil looks like just before it begins
smoking. The rule of thumb for maple syrup and for oil are, by defini-
tion, the rules of experience.

Those who do not have access to scientific methods and laboratory
verification have often relied on métis to develop rich knowledge sys-
tems that are remarkably accurate. Traditional navigation skills before
the eras of sextants, magnetic compasses, charts, and sonar are a case
in point. I refer again to the Bugis in this context, because their skills
have been so brilliantly documented by Gene Ammarell.*! In the ab-
sence of formal tide tables, the Bugis have elaborated a thoroughly re-
liable scheme for forecasting rising and falling tides, the direction of

Practical Knowledge 331

currents, and the relative strength of tides—all of which are vitally
important to their sailing plans and safety.* Calculating on the basis
of time of day, the number of days into the lunar cycle, and the mon-
soon season, the Bugis captain holds in his head a system that provides
all the accurate information he needs about tides. From an astrono-
mer’s perspective, it seems odd that the scheme makes no reference to
the angle of declination of the moon. But since the monsoon is directly
related to the declination of the moon, it serves effectively as a proxy.
The cognitive map of the Bugis captain can be reconstructed in writ-
ten form, as Ammarell has done, for illustrative purposes, but it was
learned orally and by informal apprenticeship among the Bugis.
Given the complexity of the phenomena it is meant to address, the sys-
tem for evaluating and predicting tides is elegantly simple and emi-
nently effective.

The Dynamism and Plasticity of Métis

The term “traditional,” as in “traditional knowledge”—a term that I
have carefully avoided—is a misnomer, sending all the wrong sig-
nals.® In the mid-nineteenth century, explorers in West Africa stumbled
upon groups growing maize, a New World grain, as their main staple.
Although it was unlikely that the West Africans had been growing
maize for longer than two generations, its cultivation was already sur-
rounded by elaborate rituals and myths about a maize goddess or
spirit who had given them the first kernels. What was striking was both
the alacrity with which they had adopted maize and the speed with
which they had integrated it into their traditions.“ The apparent spread
of variolation across four continents is a further instance of how widely
and how rapidly “traditional peoples” will embrace techniques that
solve vital problems. Examples could be multiplied. Sewing machines,
matches, flashlights, kerosene, plastic bowls, and antibiotics are only a
tiny sample of the products that solved vital problems or eliminated
great drudgery and were thus readily accepted.® Practical efficacy is,
as we have noted, the key test of métis knowledge, and all these prod-
ucts passed with flying colors.

The point that I am making would hardly need emphasis or elabo-
rate illustration except for the fact that a certain understanding of sci-
ence, modernity, and development has so successfully structured the
dominant discourse that all other kinds of knowledge are regarded as
backward, static traditions, as old wives’ tales and superstitions. High
modernism has needed this “other,” this dark twin, in order to rhetori-
cally present itself as the antidote to backwardness. The binary oppo-

332 THE MISSING LINK

sition also comes from a history of competition between the institutions
and personnel that sprang up around these two forms of knowledge.
Modern research institutions, agricultural experiment stations, sellers
of fertilizer and machinery, high-modernist city planners, Third World
developers, and World Bank officials have, to a considerable degree,
made their successful institutional way in the world by the systematic
denigration of the practical knowledge that we have called métis.

Their characterization could not, in this context, be further from the
truth. Métis, far from being rigid and monolithic, is plastic, local, and
divergent.® It is in fact the idiosyncracies of métis, its contextualness,
and its fragmentation that make it so permeable, so open to new ideas.
Métis has no doctrine or centralized training; each practitioner has his
or her own angle. In economic terms, the market for métis is often one
of nearly perfect competition, and local monopolies are likely to be bro-
ken by innovation from below and outside. If a new technique works,
it is likely to find a clientele.

In his defense of traditionalism against rationalism, Michael
Oakeshott emphasizes the pragmatism of real, existing traditions:
“The big mistake of the rationalist—though it is not inherent in the
method— is to assume that ‘tradition,’ or what is better called ‘prac-
tical knowledge,’ is rigid, fixed and unchanging —in fact it is ‘preem-
inently fluid.’ ”** Tradition, in part because of its local variation, is pli-
able and dynamic. “No traditional way of behavior, no traditional skill
ever remains fixed,” he says elsewhere. “Its history is one of continual
change.”® The changes are likely to be small and gradual (incremen-
talism) rather than sudden and discontinuous.

It is worth emphasizing the degree to which oral cultures, as op-
posed to written cultures, may avoid the rigidity of orthodoxy. Because
an oral culture has no textual reference point for marking deviations,
its religious myths, rituals, and folklore are likely to drift. The tales and
traditions currently in circulation vary with the speaker, the audience,
and local needs. Having no yardstick like a sacred text to measure the
degree of drift from its Ur-tradition, such a culture can change greatly
over time and simultaneously think of itself as remaining faithful to
tradition.”

Perhaps the best analogy for a society’s stock of métis is its lan-
guage. Yes, there are rules of thumb for expression: clichés, formulas
of politeness, customs for swearing, and conventional conversations.
But unless there is a central committee of grammarians with dracon-
ian police powers, the language is always being added to as new expres-
sions and novel combinations are invented and puns and irony un-
dermine old formulas. Under great pressure and rapid change, the

Practical Knowledge 333

language may change rather dramatically and new hybrids arise, but
for the people who speak it, it remains recognizably their language.
Influence over the direction of a language is never equally distributed,
but innovation comes from far and wide, and if others find a particu-
lar innovation useful or apposite, they will adopt it as part of their lan-
guage. In language as in métis, seldom is the name of an innovator
remembered, and this, too, helps to make the result a joint, mutual
product.

The Social Context of Métis and Its Destruction

While doing fieldwork in a small village in Malaysia, I was constantly
struck by the breadth of my neighbors’ skills and their casual knowl-
edge of local ecology. One particular anecdote is representative. Grow-
ing in the compound of the house in which I lived was a locally famous
mango tree. Relatives and acquaintances would visit when the fruit
was ripe in the hope of being given a few fruits and, more important,
the chance to save and plant the seeds next to their own house. Shortly
before my arrival, however, the tree had become infested with large red
ants, which destroyed most of the fruit before it could ripen. It seemed
nothing could be done short of bagging each fruit. Several times I no-
ticed the elderly head of household, Mat Isa, bringing dried nipah palm
fronds to the base of the mango tree and checking them. When I finally
got around to asking what he was up to, he explained it to me, albeit
reluctantly, as for him this was pretty humdrum stuff compared to our
usual gossip. He knew that small black ants, which had a number of
colonies at the rear of the compound, were the enemies of large red
ants. He also knew that the thin, lancelike leaves of the nipah palm
curled into long, tight tubes when they fell from the tree and died. (In
fact, the local people used the tubes to roll their cigarettes.) Such tubes
would also, he knew, be ideal places for the queens of the black ant
colonies to lay their eggs. Over several weeks he placed dried nipah
fronds in strategic places until he had masses of black-ant eggs begin-
ning to hatch. He then placed the egg-infested fronds against the
mango tree and observed the ensuing week-long Armageddon. Several
neighbors, many of them skeptical, and their children followed the for-
tunes of the ant war closely. Although smaller by half or more, the
black ants finally had the weight of numbers to prevail against the red
ants and gain possession of the ground at the base of the mango tree.
As the black ants were not interested in the mango leaves or fruits
while the fruits were still on the tree, the crop was saved.

This successful field experiment in biological controls presupposes

334 THE MISSING LINK

several kinds of knowledge: the habitat and diet of black ants, their
egg-laying habits, a guess about what local material would substitute
as movable egg chambers, and experience with the fighting proclivities
of red and black ants. Mat Isa made it clear that such skill in practical
entomology was quite widespread, at least among his older neighbors,
and that people remembered something like this strategy having worked
once or twice in the past. What is clear to me is that no agricultural ex-
tension official would have known the first thing about ants, let alone
biological controls; most extension agents were raised in town and in
any case were concerned entirely with rice, fertilizer, and loans. Nor
would most of them think to ask; they were, after all, the experts, trained
to instruct the peasant. It is hard to imagine this knowledge being cre-
ated and maintained except in the context of lifelong observation and a
relatively stable, multigenerational community that routinely exchanges
and preserves knowledge of this kind.

One purpose of this illustration is to alert us to the social conditions
necessary for the reproduction of comparable practical knowledge.
These social conditions, at a minimum, would seem to require a com-
munity of interest, accumulated information, and ongoing experimen-
tation. Occasionally there are formal institutions that seem almost per-
fectly tailored to the collection and exchange of practical information,
such as the veillées of nineteenth-century France. The veillée, as its
name implies, was a traditional pattern of gathering practiced by farm
families during winter evenings, often in barns to take advantage of
the warmth generated by the livestock and thus save on fuel. With no
agenda save sociability and economy, the gatherings amounted to lo-
cal assemblies where opinions, stories, agricultural news, advice, gos-
sip, and religious or folk tales were exchanged while the participants
shelled nuts or embroidered. Given the fact that each member there
possessed a lifetime of interested observation and practice in which
every family paid for the consequences of its agricultural decisions, the
veillée was an unheralded daily seminar on practical knowledge.

This brings us squarely to two of the great ironies of métis. The first
is that métis is not democratically distributed. Not only does it depend
on a touch or a knack that may not be common, but access to the ex-
perience and practice necessary for its acquisition may be restricted.
Artisan guilds, gifted craftsmen, certain classes, religious fraternities,
entire communities, and men in general often treat some forms of
knowledge as a monopoly they are reluctant to share. Better stated, the
availability of such knowledge to others depends greatly on the social
structure of the society and the advantages that a monopoly in some
forms of knowledge can confer.”! In this respect métis is not unitary,

Practical Knowledge 335

and we should perhaps speak of metises, recognizing its nonhomo-
geneity. The second irony is that, however plastic and receptive métis
is, some forms of it seem to depend on key elements of preindustrial
life for their elaboration and transmission. Communities that are mar-
ginal to markets and to the state are likely to retain a high degree of
métis; they have no choice, as they have to rely disproportionately on
the knowledge and materials at hand. If, while shopping at the local
store or visiting at the farmers’ association, Mat Isa had found a cheap
pesticide that would have finished off the red ants, I don’t doubt that he
would have used it.

Some forms of métis are disappearing every day.” As physical mo-
bility, commodity markets, formal education, professional specializa-
tion, and mass media spread to even the most remote communities,
the social conditions for the elaboration of métis are undermined. One
could; with great justice, welcome a great many of these extinctions of
local knowledge. Once matches become widely available, why would
anyone want to know, except as a matter of idle curiosity, how to make
fire with flint and tinder? Knowing how to scrub clothes on a wash-
board or on a stone in the river is undoubtedly an art, but one gladly
abandoned by those who can afford a washing machine. Darning skills
were similarly lost, without much nostalgia, when cheap, machine-
made stockings came on the market. As the older Bugis seamen say,
“These days, with charts and compasses, anyone can steer.’””3 And why
not? The production of standardized knowledge has made certain
skills more broadly—more democratically —available, as they are no
longer the preserve of a guild that may refuse admission or insist on a
long apprenticeship.”* Much of the world of métis that we have lost is
the all but inevitable result of industrialization and the division of
labor. And much of this loss was experienced as a liberation from toil
and drudgery.

But it would be a serious error to believe that the destruction of
métis was merely the inadvertent and necessary by-product of eco-
nomic progress. The destruction of métis and its replacement by stan-
dardized formulas legible only from the center is virtually inscribed in
the activities of both the state and large-scale bureaucratic capitalism.
As a “project,” it is the object of constant initiatives which are never en-
tirely successful, for no forms of production or social life can be made
to work by formulas alone —that is, without métis. The logic animating
the project, however, is one of control and appropriation. Local knowl-
edge, because it is dispersed and relatively autonomous, is all but un-
appropriable. The reduction or, more utopian still, the elimination of
métis and the local control it entails are preconditions, in the case of

336 THE MISSING LINK

the state, of administrative order and fiscal appropriation and, in the
case of the large capitalist firm, of worker discipline and profit.

The subordination of métis is fairly obvious in the development of
mass production in the factory. A comparable de-skilling process is, I be-
lieve, more compelling and, given the intractable obstacles to complete
standardization, ultimately less successful in agricultural production.

As Stephen Marglin’s early work has convincingly shown, capitalist
profit requires not only efficiency but the combination of efficiency and
control.’5 The crucial innovations of the division of labor at the sub-
product level and the concentration of production in the factory repre-
sent the key steps in bringing the labor process under unitary control.
Efficiency and control might coincide, as in the case of the mechanized
spinning and weaving of cotton. At times, however, they might be un-
related or even contradictory. “Efficiency at best creates a potential
profit,” notes Marglin. “Without control the capitalist cannot realize
that profit. Thus organizational forms which enhance capitalist control
may increase profits and find favor with capitalists even if they affect
productivity and efficiency adversely. Conversely, more efficient ways
of organizing production which reduce capitalist control may end up
reducing profits and being rejected by capitalists.””° The typical struc-
ture of artisanal production was often an impediment to efficiency. But
it was nearly always an obstacle to capitalist profits. In the “putting-
out” system in textiles that prevailed before factory organization, cot-
tage workers had control over the raw material, could set the pace of
the work, and could increase their return by various stratagems that
were difficult to monitor. The crucial advantage of the factory, from the
boss's point of view, was that he could more directly fix the hours and
the intensity of the work and control the raw materials.’ To the degree
that efficient production could still be organized on an artisanal basis
(such as early woolen manufacturing and silk ribbon weaving, accord-
ing to Marglin), to that degree was it difficult for the capitalist to ap-
propriate the profits of a dispersed craft population.

The genius of modern mass-production methods, Frederick Tay-
lor, saw the issue of destroying métis and turning a resistant, quasi-
autonomous, artisan population into more suitable units, or “factory
hands,” with great clarity. “Under scientific management . . . the man-
agers assume. . . the burden of gathering together all of the traditional
knowledge which in the past has been possessed by the workmen and
then of classifying, tabulating, and reducing this knowledge to rules,
laws, formulae. . . . Thus all of the planning which under the old sys-
tem was done by the workmen, must of necessity under the new sys-
tem be done by management in accordance with the law of science.””8

Practical Knowledge 337

In the Taylorized factory, only the factory manager had the knowledge
and command of the whole process, and the worker was reduced to
the execution of a small, often minute, part of the overall process. The
result was often remarkably efficient, as in the early Ford plants; it was
always, however, a great boon to control and profit.”?

The utopian dream of Taylorization—a factory in which every pair
of hands was more or less reduced to automatic movements, on the
model of programmed robots—was unrealizable. Not that it wasn’t
tried. David Noble has described the well-funded attempt to make ma-
chine tools through numerical controls because it promised “emanci-
pation from the human worker.’*° Its ultimate failure came precisely
because the system had designed out métis—the practical adjust-
ments that an experienced worker would make to compensate for
slight changes in material, temperatures, the wear on or irregularities
in the machine, mechanical malfunction, and so forth. As one operator
said, “Numerical controls are supposed to be like magic, but all you
can do automatically is produce scrap.”*! This conclusion could be gen-
eralized. In a brilliant ethnography of the work routines of machine op-
erators whose jobs appeared to have been thoroughly de-skilled, Ken
Kusterer has shown how the workers nevertheless had to develop in-
dividual skills that were absolutely necessary to successful production
but that could never be reduced to formulas a novice could immedi-
ately use. One machine operator, whose job was classified as “unskilled,”
drew an analogy between performing his job and driving a car: “Cars
are basically the same but every car is different. . . . At first when you're
learning, you just learn rules about driving. But as you get to know
how to drive, you get a feel for the car you're driving—you know,
things like how it feels at different speeds, how well the brakes work,
when it’s going to overheat, how to start it when it’s cold. . .. Then if
you think about old cars like these machines, been running three shifts
for twenty years, some of them, like maybe you've got a car with no
horn, that wants to turn right when you hit the brake, that don’t start
right unless you pump the gas in a certain way—then maybe you see
what it’s like trying to run these old machines they’ve got down here.”*

Taylorization has its analogue in agricultural production as well, an
analogue with a far longer and more variegated history. In agriculture,
as in manufacturing, the mere efficiency of a form of production is not
sufficient to ensure the appropriation of taxes or profits. Independent
smallholder agriculture may, as we have noted, be the most efficient
way to grow many crops. But such forms of agriculture, although they
may present possibilities for taxation and profit when their products
are bulked, processed, and sold, are relatively illegible and hard to

338 THE MISSING LINK

control. As is the case with autonomous artisans and petit-bourgeois
shopkeepers, monitoring the commercial fortunes of small-fry farms is
an administrative nightmare. The possibilities for evasion and resis-
tance are numerous, and the cost of procuring accurate, annual data is
high, if not prohibitive.**

A state mainly concerned with appropriation and control will find
sedentary agriculture preferable to pastoralism or shifting agriculture.
For the same reasons, such a state would generally prefer largeholding
to smallholding and, in turn, plantation or collective agriculture to both.
Where control and appropriation are the overriding considerations,
only the last two forms offer direct control over the workforce and its
income, the opportunity to select cropping patterns and techniques,
and, finally, direct control over the production and profit of the enter-
prise. Although collectivization and plantation agriculture are seldom
very efficient, they represent, as we have seen, the most legible and
hence appropriable forms of agriculture.

The large capitalist agricultural producer faces the same problem
as the factory owner: how to transform the essentially artisanal or
métis knowledge of farmers into a standardized system that will allow
him greater control over the work and its intensity. The plantation
was one solution. In colonial countries, where able-bodied men were
pressed into service as gang labor, the plantation represented a kind
of private collectivization, inasmuch as it relied on the state for the ex-
tramarket sanctions necessary to control its labor force. More than
one plantation sector has made up what it lacked in efficiency by using
its political clout to secure subsidies, price supports, and monopoly
privileges.

The control made possible by the plantation, not to mention the col-
lective farm, has proved, with few exceptions, to entail such high costs
in supervision, rigidity, and overhead as to be inefficient. Now that
plantation agriculture has been discredited, some of the newer alter-
natives devised to replicate its control and standardization are in-
structive, as they indicate the functional similarity that may lie behind
different forms.** The invention of contract farming worldwide is just
one noteworthy example.*> When chicken farmers realized that huge,
centralized operations for raising fryers not only were inefficient but
posed serious disease and environmental problems, they devised a
kind of high-tech putting-out system.® The large firm contracts with a
farmer to supply him with chicks and then to buy back (after six weeks
or so) a certain number of chickens meeting their standards. The farmer,
for his part, is obliged to construct and pay for a building that meets
corporate specifications and to feed, water, and medicate the chickens

Practical Knowledge 339

with rations supplied by the corporation and according to their precise
timetable. An inspector frequently verifies compliance. For the corpo-
ration, the advantages are enormous: it risks no capital except what is
invested in the birds; it needs no land of its own; its management ex-
penses are small; it achieves uniform product standards; and, not least,
it can fail to renew a contract or change the price paid after each
round at no cost to itself.

The logic, although not the form, is the same as on the plantation.
Given its national or international market, what the corporation re-
quires is absolute, guaranteed uniformity of product and a stable sup-
ply.’’ The need to administer the production of uniform fryers in many
different localities requires an optic of standardization and aggrega-
tion. As we saw in the case of scientific forestry, this is not merely a
question of inventing measures that accurately reflect the facts on the
ground and that can be conveyed to administrators. It is, above all, a
question of changing the environment so that it is more standardized to
begin with. Only the standardized breeding, the building constructed to
specifications, the fixed formula for feed, and the mandatory feeding
schedule—all disciplined by the contract—make it possible for a sin-
gle specialist to inspect one hundred poultry farms raising fryers for,
say, Kentucky Fried Chicken, and to ensure that the variation is mini-
mal. One can visualize his handy checklist. The purpose of contract
farming is not to understand farms and adapt to them; rather, it is to
transform farms and farm labor at the outset so that they fit the grid of
the contract.

For farmers who sign up, as long as the contracts are rolled over,
there are profits to be made, although at considerable risk. The con-
tracts are short term, the work schedules detailed, and the set-up and
supplies mandatory. The contract farmers are in theory small-business
entrepreneurs, but aside from the fact that they risk their land and build-
ings, they have not much more control over their working day than do
assembly-line workers.

The Case Against Imperial Knowledge

They said . . . that he was so devoted to Pure Science . . . that he would rather
have people die by the right therapy than be cured by the wrong.
—Sinclair Lewis, Arrowsmith

The argument that I have been venturing is not a case against high
modernism or state simplifications per se or, to be sure, against epis-
temic knowledge per se. Our ideas about citizenship, public-health pro-

340 THE MISSING LINK

grams, social security, transportation, communication, universal pub-
lic education, and equality before the law are all powerfully influenced
by state-created, high-modernist simplifications. I will go further and
say that the initial land reforms in Bolshevik Russia and in postrevo-
lutionary China were state-abetted simplifications that effectively en-
franchised millions who had lived in virtual serfdom. Epistemic knowl-
edge, though never separate in its practice from métis, has provided us
with a knowledge of the world that, for all its darker aspects, few of us
would want to surrender.

What has proved to be truly dangerous to us and to our environ-
ment, I think, is the combination of the universalist pretensions of epis-
temic knowledge and authoritarian social engineering. Such a combina-
tion has been at work in city planning, in Lenin’s view of revolution
(but not his practice), in collectivization in the Soviet Union, and in vil-
lagization in Tanzania. The combination is implicit in the logic of sci-
entific agriculture and explicit in its colonial practice. When schemes
like these come close to achieving their impossible dreams of ignoring
or suppressing métis and local variation, they all but guarantee their
own practical failure.

Universalist claims seem inherent in the way in which rationalist
knowledge is pursued. Although I am no philosopher of knowledge,
there seems to be no door in this epistemic edifice through which métis
or practical knowledge could enter on its own terms. It is this imperi-
alism that is troubling. As Pascal wrote, the great failure of rationalism
is “not its recognition of technical knowledge, but its failure to recog-
nize any other.’** By contrast, métis does not put all its eggs in one bas-
ket; it makes no claim to universality and in this sense is pluralistic. Of
course, certain structural conditions can thwart this imperialism of epi-
stemic claims. Democratic and commercial pressures sometimes oblige
agricultural scientists to premise their work on practical problems as
defined by farmers. During the Meiji Restoration, three-person techni-
cal teams began by investigating farmers’ innovations and then taking
them back to the laboratory to perfect them. The construction workers
who refused to leave Brasilia as planned or the disillusioned ujamaa
villagers who fled from their settlements to some degree undid the
plans made for them. Such resistance, however, comes from outside the
paradigm of epistemic knowledge itself. When someone like Albert
Howard, himself a meticulous scientist, recognizes the “art” of farm-
ing and the nonquantifiable ways of knowing, he steps outside the
realm of codified, scientific knowledge.

Authoritarian high-modernist states in the grip of a self-evident
(and usually half-baked) social theory have done irreparable damage

Practical Knowledge 341

to human communities and individual livelihoods. The danger was
compounded when leaders came to believe, as Mao said, that the peo-
ple were a “blank piece of paper” on which the new regime could write.
The utopian industrialist Robert Owen had the same vision for the fac-
tory town New Lanark, although on a civic rather than national level:
“Each generation, indeed each administration, shall see unrolled before
it the blank sheet of infinite possibility, and if by chance this tabula
rasa had been defaced by the irrational scribblings of tradition-ridden
ancestors, then the first task of the rationalist must be to scrub it
clean.”89

What conservatives like Oakeshott miss, I think, is that high mod-
ernism has a natural appeal for an intelligentsia and a people who may
have ample reason to hold the past in contempt.” Late colonial mod-
ernizers sometimes wielded their power ruthlessly in transforming a
population that they took to be backward and greatly in need of in-
struction. Revolutionaries have had every reason to despise the feudal,
poverty-stricken, inegalitarian past that they hoped to banish forever,
and sometimes they havé also had a reason to suspect that immediate
democracy would simply bring back the old order. Postindependence
leaders in the nonindustrial world (occasionally revolutionary leaders
themselves) could not be faulted for hating their past of colonial dom-
ination and economic stagnation, nor could they be faulted for wasting
no time or democratic sentimentality on creating a people that they
could be proud of. Understanding the history and logic of their com-
mitment to high-modernist goals, however, does not permit us to over-
look the enormous damage that their convictions entailed when com-
bined with authoritarian state power.

The Institution for Social and Policy Studies at Yale University

The Yale isps Series S ee i ng
Like a State

How Certain Schemes to
Improve the Human
Condition Have Failed

James C. Scott

Yale University Press

New Haven and London

This is a book in the Yale Agrarian Studies Series, James C. Scott, series editor.

Copyright © 1998 by Yale University.

All rights reserved.

This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, including illustrations, in any form
(beyond that copying permitted by Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and
except by reviewers for the public press), without written permission from the publishers.

Designed by James J. Johnson and set in Aster type by Running Feet Books, Durham, NC.
Printed in the United States of America

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Scott, James C.
Seeing like a state : how certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed /
James C. Scott.
p. cm.—(Yale agrarian studies) (The Yale ISPS series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-300-07016-0 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN 13: 978-0-300-07815-2 (pbk.: alk. paper)

1. Central planning—Social aspects. 2. Social engineering. 3. Authoritarianism.
I. Title. II. Series. III. Series: The Yale ISPS series.
HD87.5.S365 1998
338.9—dc21 97-26556

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

The paper in this book meets the guidelines for permanence and durability of the Com-
mittee on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity of the Council on Library Re-
sources.

15 14 13

For Louise, again, always

Regular                 Article
Engineering for
Human Rights:
The Theory and
Practice of a Human
Rights–based Approach
to Engineering
Davis Chacon-Hurtado1, Kazem Kazerounian2,
Shareen Hertel3, Jonathan Mellor4, Jack J. Barry5
and Tulasi Ravindran6
Abstract
The welfare of society and the relationship between people and the natural
environment are all directly impacted by engineering work, and codes
of ethics are central to the profession. Yet many engineers struggle to
1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering & Human Rights Institute, University of
Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
2School of Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA.
3Political Science & Human Rights, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
4Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth,
MA, USA
5Center for Public Interest Communications (CPIC), College of Journalism and Communica-
tions, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
6Department of Civil, Architectural, and Environmental Engineering, Cockrell School of
Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA
Corresponding Author:
Davis Chacon-Hurtado, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering & Human Rights
Institute, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA.
Email: davis.chacon-hurtado@uconn.eduScience, Technology, & Human Values
ªThe Author(s) 2023
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/01622439231211112
journals.sagepub.com/home/sth2024, Vol. 49(4) 898-934

incorporate these principles into their daily work because such codes
Keywords
human rights, engineering, ethics, well-being, society, social justice
Introduction
Engineering, by definition, applies science and mathematics to adapt and
transform matter and energy, ostensibly for the benefit of people and the
planet. A common underlying assumption is that engineers’ work can con-
tribute to enhancing public welfare. Yet technological developments central
to the field are not traditionally accompanied by holistic analyses of their
potential impact on humans or the environment (Bugliarello 1991). Instead,
science and engineering innovations are often pursued solely because of
their potential to “advance knowledge,” without considering a priori the
environmental or human contexts in which they are developed or whether
there are any implicit biases in their design. A predictable result is that the
potential to disrupt or impact human societies and individuals becomes
apparent only after those technologies are already established.
Engineering design does not take place in a vacuum (Leydens and
Lucena 2014; National Academy of Engineering (NAE) 2017b): it occurs
within sociotechnical systems that are themselves bounded by environmen-
tal constraints. Social change poses new challenges to engineering, and the
field of engineering itself influences the development of society in an
endogenous relationship. Modern engineering has also been an integral
driver of unprecedented anthropocentric change in the natural environment
(Zalasiewicz et al. 2010). But are engineering professionals aware of these899 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
typically emphasize professional conduct without re ﬂecting on the role of
engineering within such complex social and environmental systems. In this
paper, we propose a human rights –based approach to engineering anchored
inﬁve core principles of distributive justice, broad participation, explicit
consideration of duty-bearers, accountability for all actors involved, and
indivisibility of rights. This is a new paradigm that draws on universal princi-
ples to shape individual ethical obligations and the norms of the profession to
prevent risk, enhance access to the bene ﬁts of technology, and redress social
and environmental harms resulting from engineered products or processes.
This paradigm could transform both university education and professional
practice by harmonizing existing engineering ethics with core human rights
obligations to respect, protect, and ful ﬁll human rights.
dynamics? Are engineering students trained to think critically about ethical
principles regarding human welfare and the implications of their activities
for natural systems? Would engineers be able to realize these principles if
they become conscious of their role in society?
Professional bodies and other engineering institutions, such as the US
National Center for Science and Civic Engagement and the US NAE, have
all worked to promote “social good” and help engineers become more
aware of the impact of engineering on people and the environment, the
unintended consequences of technology, and the disorientating impacts of
technology (National Research Council 2009). These efforts were animated
by general principles of social welfare, not by concrete and measurable
standards that offer proven mechanisms for mitigating risk and ensuring
equitable access to the benefits of science at global and local levels. Simi-
larly, although most engineering codes agree to hold paramount the safety,
health, and welfare of the public (Harris, Pritchard, and Rabins 2009), there
is still significant ambiguity in interpreting who the public is or what public
welfare might mean or the types of hierarchies that affect such outcomes.
Research on engineering education in the United States (Cech 2014), in
particular, demonstrates that learning objectives pertaining to ethics and
public welfare actually decline significantly as engineering students move
through their undergraduate education (typically over four years). So, while
institutions such as the NAE encourage professionals to address social and
environmental sustainability, many engineers still struggle to see connec-
tions between their work and societal issues such as social exclusion, pov-
erty, and hunger. Furthermore, after the Second World War, engineers
became more aware of their social responsibilities and the social impact
of their work (see Mitcham 2009), and the early twenty-first century saw
growing recognition that the scale of anthropocentric-driven environmental
change is exacerbating inequality and precarity.
The “Engineering for Human Rights” framework explored in this paper
helps translate this emerging awareness and realization into actionable
items and provides standards for accountability across engineering fields,
projects,1and design processes. As both a pedagogical approach and
research orientation, this paradigm centers on human dignity grounded in
the fundamental principles of universality, indivisibility, and equity. Our
work starts from the assumption that grounding engineering in human rights
theory and standards can enhance engineers’ ability to enact socially and
environmentally responsive technological solutions that advance human
dignity (see also Buchanan 2001). Human rights–based frameworks have
the advantage of being grounded in moral claims that are backed up by900 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
international legal obligations (Land and Aronson 2018). The framework
we develop in this paper straddles all arenas of engineering practice: from
engineering education, through certification and ethics training in practice,
to developments at the frontiers of basic science (Hunt and MacNaughton
2006). This framework could contribute to practical efforts to evaluate the
impact of engineering in society as well as promote new human-centered
and environmentally centered design paradigms.
We define Engineering for Human Rights as a paradigm that draws on a
universal set of principles to shape individual ethical obligations and the
norms of the profession to mitigate risk, enhance access to the benefits of
technology, and redress harms resulting from engineered products or pro-
cesses. In the following sections, we offer an overview of core human
rights, ethics, and related concepts linked to engineering practice. We then
explore five fundamental principles central to our proposed new paradigm.
We conclude by illustrating how these five principles can be translated into
engineering practice.
Our aim is to motivate students and educators to explore the new
paradigm of engineering introduced in this paper, but to do so while
s e e k i n gt o“ a p p l yt h e s ec r i t e r i aw i t ht he epistemic humility—recognizing
that our way of knowing is not the only way of knowing—and relationality
with which they are presented and in tended” (Riley 2018, in Leydens and
Lucena 2018).
Core Human Rights Concepts Associated
with Engineering
Put very simply, a human right is a claim by someone, on someone, for
something essential to human dignity. For more than a half century, the
United Nations’ (UN) Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) has
served as a globally recognized standard that succinctly outlines the most
essential rights. These have been translated into law and institutional prac-
tice through courts, commissions, and other monitoring bodies worldwide.
Rights concepts are also central to corporate codes of conduct, professional
standards, and individual people’s efforts to protect and promote social and
environmental protections at the grassroots level.
Despite some criticism of the UDHR, human rights transcend particular
political philosophies and are more precise than generalized notions of
social justice. Instead, human rights rely on the concepts of human dignity,
equality, and nondiscrimination. These concepts or pillars of human rights
are relevant to engineering in multiple ways. For instance, an engineer901 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
needs to determine whether their projects result in discriminatory outcomes:
are particular groups excluded from receiving benefits from the project
(e.g., is a transportation project designed without having the needs of people
with disabilities in mind)? The engineer thus needs to consider different
levels of access to the outputs created through their work (e.g., are new
medical devices designed with special consideration for how their costs
may affect equal access to health?).
Engineers are integrally involved in creating scientific and technical pro-
cesses across multiple industries and research sectors; those industrial activ-
ities, in turn, have significant environmental implications both ongoing and
yet indeterminate.2We thus suggest that four key principles shape the relation
between technology and human rights. First is the principle (central to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights ) that all people have the intrinsic
right to benefit from the advancement of science. Human rights theory has
continued to evolve to acknowledge that the right to benefit is bounded by the
rights of future generations and the rights of nature itself. Second is the
principle that access to technology itself is instrumental to realizing other
rights. Third, independent of whether rights are fully realized, access to
technology can enhance the efficiency and scope of the distribution of human
rights, or impede it. Fourth, because human rights and engineering are both
constantly evolving, future adaptation (beyond current limits) is essential
because new technologies will impact rights in unknown ways.
Engineering for human rights reflects the intrinsic and instrumental roles
of technology (i.e., access to technology for its own sake and access to
technology as an enabler of other forms development). Some rights are
justified by being “intrinsic” to our humanity (i.e., they are integral to
ensuring human dignity in and of themselves, such as the right to physical
integrity). Instrumental rights, by contrast, make a contribution toward the
achievement of other rights, for example, the right to property enables a
person to ensure her right to a decent standard of living (DesJardins and
McCall 2014). Thinking about these distinctions in relation to engineering,
we could argue that the intrinsic right to physical integrity hinges on the
structural integrity of b uildings that civil engineers design and inspect
routinely. In the absence of structural integrity, our right to physical safety
would be violated. By contrast, instrumental rights such as the right of
access to technology (such as high-speed internet access) are integral to
fulfilling other primary rights, such as the right to education. Similarly, the
right to vote is integral to exercising our political rights—so cybersecurity
measures that safeguard voting integrity play an instrumental role in realiz-
ing political rights.902 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
Just as many types of engineers may be involved in developing voting
security measures (electrical engineers, systems engineers, and computer
hardware and software designers), different instrumental rights compound
upon one another and are inter-related. For instance, a new technology in
farming created by engineers can lead to a reduction in food shortages in
rural areas, thus instrumentally impacting the potential fulfilment of the
right to food. Similarly, engineers involved in ensuring the integrity of
water and sanitation systems (Wyndham and Harris 2014) or those who
design adaptive technologies for shoring up food and water security amid
climate change are integral to realizing multiple rights.3
New technologies are being developed continuously and rapidly, and
their impact on human rights is constantly evolving. For instance, if the
right to freedom of expression is to be upheld today, the right to freedom of
expression on the internet would need to be protected too—especially since
theUniversal Declaration of Human Rights (Article 19) states that
“Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression ...and to
seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and
regardless of frontiers.” While the drafters of the Declaration in 1948 could
not have envisioned the internet as being central to modern communica-
tions, this technological vehicle is reshaping notions of rights and risks
(Land 2013; Kaye 2018).
Given engineers’ central role in creating and designing new technologies,
the paradigm of engineering for human rights equips students and profes-
sionals alike to grapple with the ramifications of these technologies—both
positive and negative. The relationship between technology and human rights
is complex because any technological developments carry a set of preexisting
normative values and morals that shape their impacts on society as well as the
natural environment. In some instances, new technologies are a catalyst for
increasing inequality and power imbalances that affect vulnerable popula-
tions (Cozzens and Thakur 2014; Land and Aronson 2018). For example,
computer algorithms could disadvantage minority groups’ access to health
because of implicit racial biases in health assessment score calculations as
shown by Obermeyer et al. (2019).
The human rights system and corresponding theories are not without
critics—particularly when it comes to determining what a universal right
is or is not (e.g., Sen 1999). Some worry that because human rights could be
interpreted varyingly across cultures, a form of “weak relativism” could
hamper enforcement (Good 2010). The challenge is thus to align research
and business practices in engineering with the core principles of human
rights. Cultural adaptation does not absolve duty-bearers of their basic903 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
human rights obligations. And professional ethics standards encumber engi-
neers with added responsibility to safeguard rights even in culturally com-
plex settings, such as global supply chains or transnational research and
business ventures.
Human rights have been also criticized as human-centered and not con-
sidering the environment. However, while the modern post–Second World
War legal regime of human rights was by definition centered on human
dignity, an “ontological turn” in the early 2000s brought a realignment that
includes decentering the anthropo centric nature of human rights in the
interest of safeguarding the rights of nature. Environmental rights literature
(Du¨well and Bos 2016; Hiskes 2008) is grounded in the notion of shared
intergenerational risk. It entailed shifting human rights discussions beyond
an individual, anthropocentric concept of dignity toward a concept of
system-wide justice tethered to natural limits. Newer work from the United
States and the Global South points to the ongoing struggle of environmental
movements to challenge the contradictions between environmental protec-
tion and social justice (Kashwan 2018), with an explicit focus on strategic
litigation related to climate change (Rodr´ ıguez-Garavito forthcoming).
A human rights–based approach to engineering builds on the foundations
of such dynamic scholarship in the field of human rights and environmental
justice. Rather than uncritically adopting the human rights theory and cor-
responding laws and institutions, engineering for human rights moves scho-
larship and teaching in a pragmat ic direction. This complements
sociotechnical systems discussion s constructively by adding concrete
human rights laws, institutions, metrics, and networks that can be marshaled
to tackle the climate crisis while promoting well-being and equity.
Engineering Ethics
Engineering reflects and is constrained by context-specific demands and
social need; it is, therefore, a socially constructed profession that both
shapes and is shaped by its contexts (Baillie 2009). Most engineering pro-
fessional organizations developed during the nineteenth century (such as
the Institution of Civil Engineers in the United Kingdom), but it was not
until the early twentieth century that codes of ethics were developed
(Luegenbiehl and Clancy 2017).4Progressive engineers have invoked the
potential of actors in this field as change agents in both engineering practice
and education.5Yet, in contrast to other disciplines, such as medicine or
law, the ethical ends of engineering are not integral to the profession itself
(Mitcham 2009, as cited by Dias 2020). If a medical practitioner’s goal is to904 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
promote health, and a lawyer’s goal is to promote justice, engineering’s
aims and ends are not as uniform; indeed, they are still defined by dominant
forces such as governments or businesses. Therefore, we argue that aware-
ness of the context and complexities of engineering decision-making is key
to moving beyond the narrow view of engineers as simply problem solvers
(Downey 2015), and valorizing their capacity to identify problematic ethi-
cal outcomes (see Lynch and Kline 2000), and make power structures
visible (Smith and Lucena 2020).
Ethics in engineering can be viewed from two perspectives: one focuses
on the impact that the profession as a whole has on society (macro-ethics),
and the other on the conduct of practicing engineers as individual agents
(micro-ethics). Engineering ethics is thus defined as a systematic analysis
of morality and decisions in the field of engineering—as well as the moral
conduct involved in the development of technologies (Martin and
Schinzinger 2009; see also Ladd 1985). Engineers’ ethics are linked to
specific norms of conduct for “responsible” engineers; normative ethics
at this level are reflected in codes of conduct aimed at shaping engineers’
obligations and responsibilities in relation to the public, the client or
employer, and other engineers (Zandvoort, Van De Poel, and Brumsen
2000). Although these “professional ethics” are useful when operationa-
lized in codes of conduct and industry guidelines, their narrowness often
diverts attention from macro-ethical issues, such as the role of engineering
in society and the effects of the profession on the public interest (Ladd
1985), including in relation to the natural environment. The ethics taught
in engineering schools in the United States and Europe has tended to con-
flate the two perspectives, with discussions dominated by engineers’ ethics
(Basart and Serra 2013; Herkert 2001).
The development of guiding ethical principles in engineering is
relatively recent, dating back to th e first half of the twentieth century
(Luegenbiehl and Clancy 2017; Martin and Schinzinger 2009) and has
mostly focused on micro-ethics. In the United States, the field has focused
mainly on engineers’ obligations to ward their employers, emphasizing
values such as loyalty, obedience, and competence, among others. After
the Second World War, engineering ethics broadened somewhat to include
social considerations, with a growing awareness that engineers have
obligations to people other than their employers (Zandvoort, Van De Poel,
and Brumsen 2000). As a result, public safety, air pollution, and sustain-
ability all came to be within the remit of engineers’ responsibilities.
However, a review of engineering codes conducted by the NAE (2017b)
across multiple industries and economic sectors reveals a dearth of905 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
measurable environmental and societal benchmarks. Only a third of the
codes reviewed explicitly mention environmental sustainability or the envi-
ronment, despite the centrality of both to public health and safety (NAE
2017b). Not a single contemporary i ndustry or sectoral code discusses
global issues such as poverty in relation to engineering (Catalano 2014).
Most engineering ethics codes focus on “negative” duties (i.e., the obliga-
tion to protect from harm) rather than the affirmative responsibility to
promote rights through engineering practice. Harris et al. (2009) state that
nearly 80 percent of the codes on file with the National Society of Profes-
sional Engineers (NSPE) emphasize “negative” duties. Of the remaining 20
percent that emphasize “positive” action, the framing is in terms of
“aspirational ethics” enacted eit her through the efforts of the “good
engineer” (e.g., through organizations such as Engineers without Borders)
or through more general “standard aspirational work” (e.g., manufacturing
technologies that reduce pollutants).
Addressing macro-ethical issues in engineering requires the adoption of
holistic perspectives beyond what current codes of conduct provide. Moral
thinking is often guided by ethical theories grounded in utilitarianism which
inform cost–benefit approaches at the core of engineering design (Catalano
2014; Manion 2002). Utilitarianism, however, has two main shortcomings:
first, the difficulty of accuratel y valuing human life; and second, the
challenge of meting out distributive justice across people or generations
(Manion 2002; Vesilind and Gunn 1998). Inter-generational justice is par-
ticularly relevant when considering the long-term environmental and social
impact of engineered processes or substances and resource consumption on
future generations (see Hiskes 2008, for a discussion of human rights and
inter-generational justice).
Two additional problems arise here for the definition of ethics in engi-
neering. First, moral theories (e.g., utilitarian, deontological ethics) rely on
philosophical assumptions that could be questioned. Second, a code-by-
code approach lacks the moral standing of an overarching framework to
shape the role of engineers in society (Ladd 1985) because codes them-
selves are narrowly conceived (Martin and Schinzinger 2009). Codes vary
in strength and scope across professional societies, thus introducing a risky
degree of relativism across disciplines and contexts.
Codes of conduct in engineering worldwide continue to evolve as
demonstrated by the increased inclusion of principles of fairness and non-
discrimination (see, e.g., ASCE’s Canon 8 and NSPE’s Section III.1.f.). We
argue that the human rights–based framework offers a rubric for interpret-
ing ethics at individual and colle ctive levels, across human and906 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
environmental domains, with a wide geographical reach. Tackling macro-
ethical issues effectively (both professional and social; see Herkert 2001)6
requires the adoption of a comprehe nsive alternative t hat goes beyond
discussions of philosophical foundations of the field and is legible across
different schools of thought and applicable to multiple challenges. Engi-
neering design and practice are integrally related in a causal sense (both
positively and negatively) to a range of phenomena, from intellectual prop-
erty regimes, multilingual influences , and cultural diversity to national
security and cost–benefit constraints (NAE 2004). Engineering for human
rights offers a useful framework for exploring these issues.
That said, several approaches to using engineering as a tool for social
good already exist, including “social justice engineering,” “humanitarian
engineering,” and “Socially Responsible Engineering.”7In addition, some
engineers and firms have embraced the notion of “sustainable devel-
opment” as a framework for ethical action. We recap these alternatives
briefly below while pointing out some limitations. None are as universal
or generalizable as a human rights–based approach to engineering, but each
is complementary to our new paradigm as summarized in Table 1.
Social Justice Engineering
Engineers play a pivotal role in designing processes and products that shape
patterns of resource distribution, both directly and indirectly. At their best,
these processes can increase equity in the distribution of opportunities and
resources while also reducing imposed risks and harm to impacted commu-
nities (Leydens and Lucena 2014). Efforts to incorporate social justice
frameworks into engineering include Riley (2008) and Leydens and Lucena
(2018, 15), who take the capabilities approach as the core component of
their engineering for social justice framework, which is focused on actions
that “strive to enhance human capabilities (ends) [and] reduce imposed risks
and harms (means) among agentic citizens.” Oosterlaken (2009), in partic-
ular, argues that human capabilities provide a framework more appealing
than human rights because of their functionalistic orientation and
concreteness.8
Rather than posing these as rival frameworks, we view human rights and
human capabilities are inherently dynamic and deeply intertwined. In Sen’s
(2005, 163) words, “the two concepts—human rights and capabilities—go
well with each other, so long as we do not try to subsume either entirely
within the other.” They are similar in the sense that both share a commit-
ment to freedom and dignity of all individuals and just social arrangements907 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
Table 1. Mapping the Terrain: Engineering for Human Rights and Similar Frameworks.
Framework Underpinning Theory/Principles Advantages Disadvantages
Engineering and social
justiceDepends on the definition of justice, which
varies according to the philosophical
paradigm or “schools of thought”.
Engineering-related efforts refer to the
notion of “Freedoms” as developed in
the Capabilities Approach proposed by
Sen and Nussbaum“Social justice” term has a political value
and is easily recognized among activists
and engineersSocial justice is usually loosely defined and
interpreted in different ways
People following other ethical principles
may question the notion of social justice
adopted
Humanitarian
engineeringApplication of science and engineering to
direct the resources of nature with
active compassion to meet basic needs
of all—especially the powerless, poor,
or otherwise marginalizedCrisis intervention humanitarianism and
vulnerability reduction for those on
the margins of social wealth and powerApplied to very limited contexts such as
disaster relief and poverty alleviation
Engineering for
community/
sustainable
developmentUN Sustainable Development Goals Defined goals and metrics
Supported by the UNFail to address the cause of the problems
such as inequality. Not all human rights
are considered (e.g., “civil liberties” are
absent)
Engineering for human
rightsInternational Bill of Human Rights
Human rights include civil and political
rights, and economic, social, and cultural
rightsComprehensive set of goals to which all
humans are entitled
Supported by the UN and nations that
signed the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UDHR) and subsequent
covenants
Concrete principles considering human
rights for engineers to followOngoing discussions in terms of cultural
relativism and the universality of UDHR
The International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights was signed but
not ratified by the United States,
908
(Fukuda-Parr 2011). The engineering for human rights approach takes
capabilities as instrumental to9the enjoyment of human rights. The human
rights framework grounds norms in relationships of obligation and entitle-
ment at the same time as it yokes technological development to processes of
decision-making about how to design and distribute resources in ways that
enable people to live with dignity individually and in relation to one another
andthe natural world.
Humanitarian Engineering
This approach centers on using the tools and approaches of the engineering
profession in situations of crisis intervention and extreme vulnerability,
such as war and postconflict settings, or in the wake of natural disasters
(Mitcham and Mun ˜oz 2010; Moskal and Gosink 2007). The people most
affected by this approach to engineering are those on the outer margins of
social wealth and power. Dedicated humanitarian engineering and similar
programs have emerged throughout the United States, most prominently at
the Colorado School of Mines and Oregon State University.
Although the humanitarian movement evolved over time, from work
related to the International Committee of the Red Cross/Red Crescent in
the 1800s to work embracing sustainability in the 2000s (Mun ˜oz and
Mitcham 2012), its overall scope continues to be limited to the most basic
needs and specific communities under a narrow set of problems and inter-
ventions. Some, such as Frederick Cuny, have called for both disaster relief
and development jointly to improve people’s lives beyond the status quo
(Mitcham and Mun ˜oz 2010). One key strength of humanitarian engineering
is that it deals with the application of technical knowledge to real-world
problems, and it has the potential to be guided by UDHR principles that
relate not only to individual rights but also to community rights.
Sustainable Development
Sustainable development has been on the international agenda for more
than four decades, beginning with the UN Conference on the Human Envi-
ronment and the publication of “The Limits of Growth,” both in 1972
(Sachs 2015). There was limited crossover between the development and
human rights agendas until the emergence of the Human Rights Approach
to Development in the 1990s (Fukuda-Parr 2013). The ideas surrounding
sustainable development reached a significant milestone in 1992 with the
“Earth Summit” in Brazil and Agenda 21. Ten major conferences have909 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
since set priorities and standards for sustainable development. Two were
key for engineering: The Millennium Summit in 2000 with its Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs); and the Rio þ20 Conference in 2012, which
drove the emergence of the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Both the MDGs and SDGs significantly overlap with economic and social
rights, and the shift toward a rights-based framework for development in the
SDGs has helped move policymakers’ focus from the economy to people
(Fukuda-Parr 2013).
The engineering community has responded to the call for sustainable
development in two main ways: (i) through public statements recognizing
the problem targeted by sustainable development and pledging action on the
part of engineers; and (ii) by developing technological innovations and
inventions (Manion 2002). Desha et al. (2019) also describe efforts by
international engineering organizations (International Engineering Alliance
and the World Federation of Engineering Organizations) to incorporate
sustainability into their internationa l engineering benchmark standards.
Those authors highlight that sustainability initiatives around the world,
although informed by different levels of engineering focus, have contrib-
uted to bringing awareness and appreciation of engineering knowledge and
skillsets for sustainability (Desha et al. 2019; see also Ram´ ırez-Mendoza
et al. 2020; Kopnina 2018; Tranquillo 2018; Brunell 2019).
Despite their promise as a tool for tackling poverty, the SDGs are legally
nonbinding and are prone both to measurement constraints and the risk of an
“`a la carte” approach by governments and companies alike (Winkler and
Williams 2017). Engineers thus have a key role to play in developing
innovative measures and indicators to account for human rights not expli-
citly addressed in the SDGs, or those goals that are difficult to quantify,
such as the overriding principle of “leaving no one behind,” which is central
to the human rights framework.
Social Inclusion
Another approach attempting to link engineering with more socially con-
scious and ethical outcomes has been the sociological concepts of social
inclusion and exclusion. Essentiall y social inclusion d e s c r i b e sw a y st o
include groups and individuals in society, especially those who have his-
torically not been able to take part in various aspects of society. Social
inclusion is defined in terms of (i) the process of improving the terms for
individuals and groups to take part in society and (ii) the process of improv-
ing the ability, opportunity, and dignity of those who are disadvantaged in910 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
society because of their identity (The World Bank 2019). Social exclusion,
on the other hand, is defined as multidimensional (economic, political,
social, and cultural) processes driven by unbalanced power dynamics that
result in unequal access to resources, capabilities, and rights (World Health
Organization 2019). Both social inclusion and exclusion are terms that have
gained traction in academic fields (social sciences and neighboring fields)
since the 1990s and have gained significance in both developed and devel-
oping nations (Das et al. 2013).
Although engineers would be expected to be fully involved in work
toward inclusion, this has not been the case until recently. For example,
the Australian Social Inclusion Board (2012) and Social Exclusion Unit
(2003) emphasize the role that infrastructure, transport, and related services
have in mitigating exclusion—domains that are directly influenced by engi-
neering. Similarly, the concept of “universal design,” which is increasingly
central to teaching and engineering design, stipulates that products and
environments must be “usable by all people, to the greatest extent possible,
without the need for adaptation or specialized design” (Mace 1985, as cited
in Health and Places Initiative 2015).
Despite these advances, defining and measuring social inclusion/exclu-
sion remain a significant challe nge (UN Department of Economic and
Social Affairs 2016) because both terms are limited to describing only some
types of engineering outcomes that clearly affect the inclusion or exclusion
of people and groups. These terms are not as well equipped to describe the
complexity—or multiple types of impact engineering projects may have.
There is much more to being socially conscious and ethical for engineers
than can be described by the limited conceptual inclusion/exclusion binary.
For instance, how to explain the myriad ways engineering affects cyberse-
curity (which in turn affects privacy)? If one could use that technology but
not understand or edit it, would this count as exclusion? Would only coders
count as being included? Should access to the internet be promoted, and if
not, how would inclusion/exclusion address such complicated scenarios
with overlapping concerns?
Previous Efforts to Incorporate Human Rights into
Engineering Education
Previous efforts to incorporate human rights education into engineering
curricula include Bielefeldt (2019), who suggests that human rights profes-
sional education remains concentrated in social work, health sciences, and
teacher education. Lynch (2004) similarly argues that human rights and911 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
corresponding responsibilities could become central to reforms of engineer-
ing education: at present, liberal arts and humanities courses taught within
the engineering curricula are limited or incomplete, which impacts stu-
dents’ understanding of ethical ideas and professional ethics. Given the
increasingly transnational nature of engineering practice, Hoole and Hoole
(2002) have argued that human rights content should be integrated within
curricula to broaden students’ knowledge beyond domestic law, through
case-based work.
These changes in pedagogy are emblematic of a wider shift that Graham
(2018) has identified through a survey of the world’s best engineering
programs: the role, responsibilities, and ethics of engineers in society are
increasingly central to such programs. Universities such as Purdue Univer-
sity (EPICS), University of California (CARES), Baylor University, and the
University of Dayton (ETHOS) provide opportunities for minors and edu-
cational experiences that aim to brin g societal impacts (Mitcham and
Mun˜oz 2010). At the University of Connecticut, students earning a Bache-
lor of Science in engineering can double-major with a Bachelor of Arts in
human rights or complete a human rights minor or may matriculate through
a new Multidisciplinary Engineering degree with a specialization in human
rights. The work presented herein could be used to complement theoretical
discussions and similar practical efforts to advance engineering education
in ethics, sustainability, and equity.
In the next section, we explain how human rights as an ethical and
practical set of norms and standards have gained traction and had a sub-
stantial policy impact from the mid-t wentieth century, fueling the devel-
opment of our engineering for human rights paradigm. The core concepts
central to human rights (such as huma n dignity, nondiscrimination, and
equality) are more precise than a simp le inclusion/exclusion dichotomy
and more universal and comprehensive than the other approaches dis-
cussed above. Therefore, this effort is more aligned with discussions in
science and technology studies (STS; cf. Downey 2015), which call for
opening up engineering formation, for example, through Liberal Studies
in Engineering.
A Proposed Framework for Engineering for Human
Rights
The NAE (NAE) has outlined “Grand Challenges for the 21st Century”
(NAE 2017a), many of which directly touch upon issues integral to human
rights, including access to health, access to food, and privacy. However, the912 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
Grand Challenges do not fully represent the role of engineering in society.
As Cech (2012) has argued, this framework was defined by a set of experts
who were mainly from corporate and re search institutions, and mostly
male—this imbalanced representation could have skewed the selection of
both problems and solutions toward those of postindustrial (and wealthy)
societies. Cech also notes that the Grand Challenges framework fails to
acknowledge that engineering itself has contributed to some of the chal-
lenges (such as nuclear and biological weapons development), thus perpe-
tuating uncritical technology development. The framework separates the
technical from social, political, and cultural domains, reflecting both a
notion of technical/social dualism and technological determinism (Cech
2012). In that view, current and future Grand Challenges need complemen-
tary frameworks, including human r ights–based approaches, for their
capacity to examine some of the more fundamental problems behind the
Grand Challenges.
Engineers must do more than simply discern the extent to which their
work influences society. Engineers must also understand and frame their
duties, obligations, and responsibilities to society. From a human rights
perspective, this means translating normative standards and obligations of
human rights treaties and conventi ons into actions and evidence-based
measures for implementing those human rights (OHCHR 2012; Wyndham
and Harris 2014). When an engineer creates a design, they will follow
normative commitments influenced by community values, constitutional
precepts, and individual morals (Land and Aronson 2018). A human
rights–based approach to engineering complements these normative values
by centering human rights principles within the design, monitoring, and
evaluation activity central to the field. It focuses in part on setting concrete,
minimum standards (Nickel 2007) based on human rights. In practical
terms, the human rights approach not only prevents harm to people (nega-
tive rights) but also promotes the fulfillment of economic and social rights
(positive rights) by establishing a minimum floor for social or environmen-
tal protection. It extends the “Protect, Respect, Remedy” framework of the
UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights , or “Ruggie
Principles,” by applying them explicitly to engineering practice.
The framework outlined in Figure 1 situates a range of core engineering
duties, including actions to prevent harm (preventive approach), actions to
remedy harm when it occurs (restorative approach), and actions to fulfill
human rights (proactive approach). The preventive approach aims to avoid
or lessen adverse impacts on the rights of people or the natural environment
as a direct or indirect consequence of engineering projects and913 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
developments. Critically, most engineering projects do not explicitly aim to
improve human rights; instead, they seek to develop and apply technology
to solve societal issues that are implicitly associated with human rights, but
with potentially unintended or unforeseen consequences on people and the
environment.
Engineers from several disciplin es are familiar with the preventive
approach. Existing processes that fit under this approach include Environ-
mental Impact Assessments (EIAs), regulated in the United States by the
US National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) or globally by the UN
Environment Programme. EIAs are tools for estimating the potential con-
sequences of human activities on the environment and for crafting ways to
minimize, mitigate, or compensate for those impacts (Abaza, Bisset, and
Sadler 2004). EIAs are similar to Social Impact Assessments and also
parallel Human Rights Impact Assessments (HRIAs), which areFigure 1. A proposed framework of Engineering for Human Rights. Right to freedom
of movement refers to the right to liberty of movement and freedom to choose his
residence (UDHR 1948, Article 13). For example, an engineering construction
project cannot force migrant workers to stay in the country against their will. Privacy
rights refers to Article 12: “no one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with
his privacy, family, home or correspondence” (UDHR 1948). C&P: civil and political
rights; ES&C: economic, social, and cultural rights; RD&I: research, development,
and implementation of projects and technologies; and HR: human rights.914 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999

increasingly common across multiple fields. Based on qualitative and quan-
titative methods, HRIAs measure the effects of policies and programs on
human rights (Nordic Trust Fund and the World Bank 2013). Legal frame-
works undergirding this approach in clude the US Civil Rights Act of 1964
and US Executive Order 12,898 on Environmental Justice in Minority
Populations and Low-Income Populatio ns. Finally, in uncertain scenarios,
engineering professiona ls can consider a precautionary approach, as
defined in principle 15 of the Rio Declaration , to minimize negative
project outcomes.
Therestorative approach encourages engineers to take action to remedi-
ate or directly address human rights violations. Engineers have been
involved in efforts of this type, for example, by participating in forensic
work to uncover the use of chemical weapons or to analyze geospatial
images to determine where mass human rights violations are unfolding in
real time (Wyndham and Harris 2014). Engineers have also carried out
impact analyses under environmental remediation laws such as the Com-
prehensive Environmen tal Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
(CERCLA) or US Superfund of 1980. CERCLA was enacted in the wake
of environmental poisoning at Love Canal, New York (Gong 2010), where a
residential neighborhood was authorized for development atop a contami-
nated landfill in the Niagara Falls area.
Remediation projects are integral to the restorative approach and include
engineers as central players as occurred at Eagle Rock Lake in New Mexico
following contamination from mining operations (US EPA 2015). Other
examples include the Technical Assistance for Brownfields Program coor-
dinated through the University of Connecticut, in which teams of student
engineers evaluate former industrial sites for redevelopment and eventual
public/private use. It is worth noting that in the United States, approxi-
mately 22 percent of the population lives within a three-mile ratio of a
Superfund remedial site (US EPA 2017; 2020), with racial minority popu-
lations disproportionately impacted (28 percent of all minorities in the
United States). In another example, structural engineers played a leading
role in improving safety and worker rights through the Bangladesh Accord
on Factory and Fire Safety, a multi-stakeholder initiative in one of the
world’s largest export garment industries. These types of initiatives are
significant because they address the risks of industrial development and
help safeguard human rights over the long term.
Finally, the proactive approach engages engineers in preempting prob-
lems and fulfilling rights when developing and implementing various tech-
nologies, for example, by devising a manufacturing supply chain that915 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
eliminates the risk of child labor among foreign suppliers, creating indus-
trial processes to minimize resource extraction from endangered areas, or
creating systems for managing community-level access to water and sanita-
tion that build on mechanisms for ensuring equitable distribution up front.
Indeed, engineers with explicit knowledge of human rights can expand
the scope of their assessments to cover a broader range of stakeholders and
areas of impact. For example, engineers planning the development of a
pipeline through the Amazon should consider the United Nations Declara-
tion on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP, Article 10), which
mandates that “Indigenous peoples shall not be forcibly removed from their
lands or territories.” Similarly, de signers of new technologies, such as
autonomous vehicles, should take into consideration the mobility needs
of people with disabilities, as stated in Article 20 of the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The synergies of a human rights–based
approach with other development agendas and practices in engineering thus
help center the social contract of the engineering profession.
Regrettably, scholarly discussions and practical promotion of engineer-
ing ethics have not always dovetailed with the extensive literature in STS
(Van de Poel and Van Gorp 2006). We seek to integrate human rights with
engineering theory and practice precisely because of the synergies we iden-
tify with STS discussions on the internal reasoning of engineering design
and technological development. Although human rights frameworks may
not be as well recognized in the profession and or yet fully accepted, they
nevertheless offer engineering philosophers critical insights into human
dignity or the nature of obligations by duty-bearers, while also remaining
legible to engineering practitioners (i.e., as basic normative frameworks).
Given the increasingly complex social and environmental challenges facing
engineers, professional codes of ethics or simple moral reasoning may be
insufficient to fully address potential problems of technological develop-
ment (Lynch and Kline 2000).
The Engineering for Human Rights framework presented in this paper
reinforces human rights–based approaches to development (UNDP 2019).
Human rights–based approaches (HRBA) reaffirm the importance of eco-
nomic, social, and cultural rights to achieving development, and frame
poverty and inequality as human rights violations (Sano and Hansen
2006). People- and poverty-centered agendas influenced by HRBA, such
as the SDGs, overlap with core economic and social rights, and contain
stronger human rights language (Fukuda-Parr 2013). They are increasingly
embraced by the engineering co mmunity, especially the SDGs (see
UNESCO 2021). The following is our synthesis of the key principles that916 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
set the engineering for human rights paradigm at the center of the profes-
sion’s platform for teaching, research, and the practice of engineering in
business, government, and other settings.
Five Principles of Engineering for Human Rights
1.Distributive justice. This principle captures the equity implications
of engineering work in terms of the negative impacts, benefits, and
risks across population groups and inter-generationally. Engineers
must keep in mind that their work confers advantages and harm
differentially across various segments of society, both now and in
the future, which can harm the most vulnerable groups. Everyone in
a community has a claim to the benefits of an engineering project.
All sections of society must be considered in the impact assessment
for any given project to ensure no disproportionate advantages are
conferred upon one part of society over another. Particularly when
considering uncertain future scenarios, the engineer should fore-
ground concepts of resilience, vulnerability, and risk assessments
in relation to both current and future generations.
2.Participation. Members of society have the right to participate in
designing, constructing, maintaining, and/or operating engineering
processes. The specific requirements for public involvement will
vary across engineering disciplines and depend on specific projects
or even the type of funding used. Regardless of such differences,
participation is key to accounting for public interest(s) and
impact(s). For example, the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA) is a US environmental law directing projects that use Fed-
eral funding (or that require Federal approval) to engage the public
throughout the project development phase and to consider public
input before final decisions are made (US DOT 2012). In the United
States, all executive branches of the federal government must imple-
ment NEPA. Engineering disciplines not regulated by this type of
law are still subject to moral obligations toward the public interest
(which is usually embodied in codes of ethics).
3.Consideration of duty-bearers. The state and other duty-bearers are
responsible for the observance of human rights (United Nations
Sustainable Development Group 2003). There are multiple “duty-
bearers” with roles to play in implementing human rights (Fukuda-
Parr, Lawson-Remer, and Randolph 2015; Sen 2004), and engineers
are among them. By adopting a holistic approach, the engineer not917 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
only considers their core set of duties (to their employer, to the pro-
fession, and to society—see Manion 2002) but also becomes a duty-
bearer jointly with policymakers, planners, and other professionals
involved in engineering “system design.” Engineers can promote the
development of and access to technology, as well as an obligation to
use them responsibly. Engineers can play a key role in integrating
corporate policy and social policies into their work environments.
4.Accountability. Engineers who are aware of their impact(s) on soci-
ety should carry out evidence-based monitoring and implementation
of human rights in the context of their work. This ongoing feedback
is essential to ensuring accountability for both anticipated and unan-
ticipated outcomes. All actors, including representatives of state and
private agencies along with engineers and community members,
must become aware that people are entitled to a set of rights that
correspond to established targets and benchmark points. Creating
accountability processes within engineering and technology devel-
opment activity can be challenging, because technological develop-
ments occur in different phases across different teams. Traditional
methods for ensuring accountability in human rights such as
“naming and shaming” are not always possible or applicable (Land
and Aronson 2018). As project development progresses and designs
are streamlined for efficiency and accountability, tools such as life
cycle assessments should be paired with mechanisms for human
rights measurement and stakeholder involvement.
5.Indivisibility of rights. While rights may differ in scope and content,
allrights are indivisible, interdependent, and interrelated ( Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action on Human Rights , adopted
1993) and should be promoted as such. Engineers must take a com-
prehensive perspective when analyzing the potential impact of their
work on society and the environment. Some forms of engineering
may be more associated with particular types of rights impacts (such
as chemical engineering and the right to health, or civil engineering
and the right to housing), but engineers should consider potential
synergies among rights when determining how their work will help
or hinder rights enjoyment. By making the indivisibility of rights
paramount, engineering as a profession can be equipped to avoid
unintended consequences.
These five interrelated core principles can guide the work of individual
engineers and the field more generally. Impact studies of engineering918 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
projects can be framed as core human rights principles to protect
people from the harm of unintended consequences, to ensure greater
levels of shared benefits, and to design effective remedies if and when
problems occur.
For instance, a proposed highway project must be assessed with refer-
ence to the rights of people using the highways and living along the planned
path, where the distributive justice principle calls for ensuring that those
living on either side are not cut off from key resources such as schools,
shopping areas, public transportati on hubs, parks, or green spaces, for
example. Similarly, the participation principle assigns designers the respon-
sibility of engaging community members early in the design process, align-
ing with procedural justice. The consi deration of duty-bearers requires
engineers to think beyond the “problem-solver” mindset (i.e., focusing on
technical problems only) by instead making them responsible for consider-
ing the context in which the designs are embedded. Accountability means
creating or realigning metrics to more fully assess and mete out the project’s
benefits, like improved access to jobs for everyone impacted or ensuring
that no forced/child labor is used in the construction of the project.
Lastly, indivisibility calls for analyzing and reporting the project’s var-
ied impacts on other human rights to ensure that the improvements in users’
travel time do not block other communities’ access to educational facilities,
for example. By carrying out impact studies with explicit human rights
criteria integrated into the cost–benefit matrix, we are in a position to
remedy harm more precisely and effectively—in the process creating more
ethical engineering practice.
Translating the Principles into Practice
Our five principles of engineering for human rights can be applied in every-
day work by grafting them onto into engineering codes of ethics and practi-
cing them in routine professional activity. However, making this shift will
require training that many engineers do not yet have. We lay out below
thirteen applied principles to guide the work of engineers to align with
human rights principles. Land and Aronson (2018) suggested that a human
rights–based approach to technology could draw both on human rights law
and practice to guide technology design. Our applied principles use our five
engineering for human rights principles to interpret the existing moral and
ethical obligations of engineers. While rights have multiple dimensions,
some rights may be weighted more toward one dimension than another—
such as positive rights–based principles (e.g., access to housing and919 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
universal design for socially excluded groups) or negative rights–based
principles (e.g., protection from discrimination against any member of a
group). But rights are interdependent and not tradeable.
1. Engineers have an obligation to ensure that engineering systems
and designs do not exacerbate existing racial, gender, ethnic, or
religious inequalities , and they should seek to redress past harms .
For example, there is ample evidence that the construction of high-
ways passing through urban centers in the United States has con-
tributed to urban segregation. Using the preventive approach from
our five principles, engineers should make sure that future projects
do not lead to such segregation. Employing a remedial approach,
they can work to mitigate the impacts of older projects by recon-
necting city neighborhoods whenever possible.
2. Engineers must ensure that engineered systems and processes are
resilient to climatic extremes . Climate change impacts are global
but affect the most vulnerable communities the most (e.g., people
with disabilities and aging populations).
3. Engineers need to make their engineering designs and processes
accessible for persons with disabilities . Even in localities where
accessibility is not required by law, engineers should strive to make
their designs accessible for all persons.
4. The end goal of any engineering design or process should be to
improve the lives of users while not adversely affecting the well-
being of other people or the natural environment in ways that
significantly degrade their quality of life or that of future genera-
tions. Engineers should be cognizant of the impacts of their designs
on all impacted stakeholders. For example, the construction of
offshore wind farms may be environmentally beneficial overall,
but engineers should mitigate the negative impacts of the project
on people who rely on offshore fisheries for their livelihood.
5. Engineers must ensure that their engineering designs and systems
promote safe living and working conditions a n da r eo b l i g e dt o
notify public officials if they identify unsafe conditions for any
group in society, because human rights are universal. This obliga-
tion is critical even when speaking out will bring financial or
reputational harm to the engineer’s employer or outrage from the
public.
6. Engineers should incorporate risk assessment in all designs to
reduce human exposure to harmful impacts (e.g., toxic chemicals920 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
or pathogens). When engineers design a new product or process,
they should ensure that the materials the customer is exposed to
will not lead to an undue health risk. For example, although
Bisphenol A is useful for producing many plastics, it can pose a
health risk to humans, so alternative products should be explored or
engineered.
7. Engineers should consider the entire lifecycle of products and
processes to ensure adequate end- of-life reuse or disposal that
may affect adequate standards o f living for vulnerable commu-
nities now and in the future. Engin eers should cond uct a lifecycle
assessment that can pinpoint areas for improvement and prompt
recycling or reduction of materia ls to minimize overall environ-
mental impact.
8. Engineers need to ensure that all voices in society are adequately
represented in the design, constructi on, maintenance, use, and
operation of engineered products or processes. To do so, engineers
should present their projects or products to a wide range of audi-
ences to gather feedback to minimize harm and broaden access.
They should concentrate on the most vulnerable populations and
those that will be most impacted. Examples include work focused
onuniversal design , context-sensitive design, and equitable design.
9. Engineers should seek to expand access to technologies and alle-
viate the conditions that perpetuate poverty and social exclusion, so
as to improve standards of living, especially for vulnerable groups.
Engineers have an obligation to use their skills and knowledge to
ensure that the principles of universality, interdependence, and
nondiscrimination apply to marginalized individuals and groups.
10. Engineers should consider and aim to improve intrinsic political,
civil, and economic rights of all persons, including freedoms of
assembly and expression, while ensuring that such platforms seek
to promote civil discourse among stakeholders and duty-bearers.
11. Engineers should set targets and concrete benchmarks for ensuring
that their work contributes to the fulfillment of civil and political
rights, as well as the progressive realization of economic, social,
and cultural rights. Examples include efforts to generate indicators
of the progressive realization of economic, social, and cultural
rights (Fukuda-Parr et al. 2015).
12. Engineers should adopt holistic approaches reflective of the inter-
dependent and indivisible nature of rights and of the fact they apply
to everyone “regardless of race, s ex, nationality, ethnicity,921 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
language, religion, or any other status” ( Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 1948).
13. Engineers should create feedback mechanisms that enable commu-
nity members affected by a given project or technology to be heard
and submit complaints regarding rights violations and also more
generally to be in a position to partner with state and corporate
actors responsible for such projects. This feedback loop promotes
empowerment and enhances the overall agency of community
members, for example, through the use of appropriate technology
(see Frey et al. 2012, in the context of Duchity, Haiti).
Conclusion
The emergence of engineering for human rights as a framework for engi-
neering practice reflects the convergence of two trends. First, engineers
and engineering organizations are gaining awareness of the extent and
unevenness of their impact on socie ty and the natural environment. Sec-
ond, the necessity and urgency of ev idence-based measures, monitoring,
and accountability for human rights have burgeoned since the 1990s (see
Gibney and Haschke 2020). The human rights perspective is significant
because it incorporates the idea of social good as an objective, as well as
specific norms and parameters based on international law and human
rights practice.
A human rights–based approach to engineering is a new paradigm for
the twenty-first century that frames ethical principles engineers can use
both to understand their role in socie ty and to translate aspirations for
social and environmental good into projects with tangible outcomes.
Given the emergence of new technologies driven in part by engineers
themselves, there is a pre ssing need for systematic analysis of the potential
consequences of such change over time. Engineers should be aware that
the positive and negative impacts of tec hnology are not equally distributed
within society; instead, distribution skews in favor of existing power
imbalances. Furthermore, a retrospective analysis of engineering work
can help identify implicit and explicit biases in the design, implementa-
tion, and maintenance of technology.10
The human rights–based approach to engineering proposed in this article
has three broad advantages over alternative approaches: it allows for a more
comprehensive set of goals, it incorp orates existing ethical approaches
currently used by engineers (which are valid for the engineering accredita-
tion processes), and it provides a new avenue for innovation. This paradigm922 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
is grounded in a universal set of principles that both shape individual ethical
obligations and influence the norms of the profession in order to prevent
risk, enhance access to the benefits of technology, and redress harms result-
ing from engineered products or processes. Grounded in our five funda-
mental principles (distributive jus tice, broad participation, explicit
consideration of duty-bearers, accountability for all actors involved, and
indivisibility of rights), engineering for human rights offers significant
synergies with literatures such as STS and existing policy frameworks
(e.g., engineering for social justice) but moves beyond them in ways that
could transform professional education, practice, and impact.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
ORCID iD
Davis Chacon-Hurtado https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5722-3545
Notes
1. Note that engineering and engineering “projects” or “designs” are used inter-
changeably because both refer to the applications of scientific knowledge for
practical purposes, including developi ng devices, processes, methods, and
infrastructure.
2. As Zalasiewicz et al. (2010, 2230) note, the “long-term extent of this ‘built-in’
future change is currently unknowable, as it largely depends on the interplay of
feedback effects that will either amplify or diminish the effects of anthropo-
genic change.”
3. Of course, both technologies are applied within a sociopolitical context (e.g.,
fiscal or economic policies) that would impact their success.
4. See, for example, the work of reformer Morris L. Cook, who provided explicit
ideas of engineering as an independent profession and pressed for the develop-
ment of a strong and binding code of et hics for engineers to serve public
interests (Meiksins 1988). In some cases, unions were seen as appropriate
organizations to fill a gap of professional organizations, which were associated
with a lack of independence and/or inactivity. However, union power varies by
country, and unionizing efforts were often blocked by engineers-business923 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
people, who saw these organizations as making engineering labor more expen-
sive and difficult to control (Meiksins and Smith 1993).
5. Mitcham (2009) presents a four-phase development of engineering ethics.
First, implicit ethics, where professi onal behavior reflected primarily loyalty
to peers and employers, and respect and obedience to social hierarchy. Sec-
ond, ethics as loyalty, where code of ethics became instruments for differen-
tiation and professional development a nd prestige. Codes still considered
loyalty a primarily obligation. Third, ethics of efficiency, which calls for
engineers’ liberation from subservience to business and embracing an opti-
mistic view of technocratic movement as a driving force of human progress.
Finally, the fourth phase, ethics of public safety, health, and welfare, stems
from the tension between technology a nd democracy where, mostly after the
Second World War, engineers are increasingly conscious of their social
responsibilities and the societal implications of their work. Furthermore, the
twenty-first century brought undeniable e vidence that anthropocentric-driven
environmental change will exacerbate inequality and precarity for vulnerable
populations. Our work in this paper centers the engineering for human rights
paradigm alongside this realization.
6. The difference in engineering and engineering ethics could also be seen from a
need to include ethical reflections on engineering work. Grunwald (2000, 2001,
as cited in Van de Poel and Van Gorp 2006) argues there are situations in which
ethical reflections are not needed, and decision-making can be guided by a
normative framework that is comprehensive, clear, locally consistent, com-
monly accepted, and observed. Engineering codes complemented by human
rights obligations to respect, protect, and promote could be the base for such
normative frameworks. For nonbusiness-as-usual cases where public safety
could be in conflict with codes of ethics (see Lynch and Kline 2000), ethical
reflections are needed. Beyond norm ative frameworks, the human rights
approach establishes key principles of “human dignity” and “not leaving any-
one behind” as the basis for ethical reflections.
7. Winner (1990) argues that a way to move beyond individual responsibility of
engineers is by focusing on three pillars of social responsibility: responsibility
of dialogue, responsibility of awareness, and responsibility of citizenship (cited
in Smith and Lucena 2020).
8. Proponents of the capabilities approach state that justice and equality should be
evaluated not in terms of income, resources, utility, or satisfaction but in terms
of the activities people can undertake (i.e., doings) and the persons they are able
to be (i.e., beings; see Oosterlaken 2009; Robeyns and Byskov 2021). The
doings and beings, called functionalities (e.g., being well-nourished, being
educated, getting married) and capabilities (substantive or real opportunities924 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
to achieve functionalities), are therefore at the core of defining well-being
(Robeyns and Byskov 2021).
9. A general understanding of social justice includes mechanisms for distribution
of advantages and disadvantages to individuals in a society, mediated equally
through social institutions and practices based on the need and merit or deserv-
ingness of the recipients (Miller 1999) which are context-specific (Riley 2008).
Instrumental justice is grounded in the notion of action motivated by self-
interest, whereas distributive justice is grounded in the notion of society as a
community. Interpersonal relationships color one’s view of equality and justice,
with shared concepts held by citizens of defined communities (Miller 1999).
10. See, for example, National Academy of Engineering (1991).
References
Abaza, Hussein, Ronald Bisset, and Barry Sadler. 2004. Environmental Impact
Assessment and Strategic Environmental Assessment: Towards an Integrated
Approach , 1st ed. Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations Environment
Programme.
Australian Social Inclusion Board. 2012. “Social Inclusion in Australia: How Aus-
tralia Is Faring.” Report. Australian Social Inclusion Board, Australia. Accessed
November 13, 2023. https://apo.org.au/node/30582.
Baillie, Caroline. 2009. Engineering and Society: Working towards Social Justice,
Part I: Engineering and Society .Synthesis Lectures on Engineers, Technology,
and Society , 1-114. doi: 10.2200/S00136ED1V01Y200905ETS008.
Basart, Josep M., and Montse Serra. 2013. “Engineering Ethics beyond Engineers’
Ethics.” Science and Engineering Ethics 19 (1): 179-87. doi: 10.1007/s11948-
011-9293-z.
Bielefeldt, Angela R. 2019. “Human Rights as a Lens for Engineering Ethics?” 2019
ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, Tampa, FL. Accessed November 13,
2023. https://peer.asee.org/human-rights-as-a-lens-for-engineering-ethics.
Brunell, Leslie R.2019. “A Real-world Approach to Introducing Sustainability in Civil
Engineering Capstone Design.” 2019 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition,
Tampa, FL. Accesse d November 13, 2023. https://p eer.asee.org/a-real-wo
rld-approach-to-introducing-sustainabi lity-in-civil-engineering-capstone-desi
gn.
Buchanan, Richard. 2001. “Human Dignity and Human Rights: Thoughts on the
Principles of Human-centered Design.” Design Issues 17 (3): 35-39. Accessed
November 13, 2023. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1511799.
Bugliarello, George. 1991. “The Social Function of Engineering: A Current Assess-
ment.” In Engineering as a Social Enterprise , edited by Hedy E. Sladovich.
Papers Presented during the 1990 Meeting of the National Academy of925 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
Engineering in a Symposium Dedicated to the Memory of J. Herbert Hollomon.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/1829.
Catalano, George D. 2014. Engineering Ethics: Peace, Justice, and the Earth ,2 n de d .
Synthesis Lectures on Engineers, Technology, and Society , 1-85. doi: 10.2200/
S00589ED2V01Y201408ETS022.
Cech, Erin. 2012 “Great problems of Grand Challenges: Problematizing engineering’s
understandings of its role in society.” International Journal of Engineering, Social
Justice, and Peace 1( 2 ) :8 5 - 9 4 .
Cech, Erin A. 2014. “Culture of Disengagement in Engineering Education?” Science,
Technology, & Human Values 39 (1): 42-72. doi: 10.1177/0162243913504305.
Cozzens, Susan, and Dhanaraj Thakur. 2014. Innovation and Inequality: Emerging
Technologies in an Unequal World . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Das, Maitreyi Bordia, Cyprian F. Fisiy, and Rachel Kyte. 2013. “Inclusion Matters:
The Foundation for Shared Prosperity.” Report no: 81478. The World Bank.
Accessed November 13, 2023. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/
114561468154469371/Inclusion-matters-the-foundation-for-shared-prosperity.
Desha, Cheryl, Debra Rowe, and Doug Hargreaves. 2019. “A Review of Progress
and Opportunities to Foster Development of Sustainability-related Competencies
in Engineering Education.” Australasian Journal of Engineering Education
24 (2): 61-73. doi: 10.1080/22054952.2019.1696652.
DesJardins, Joseph R., and John J. McCall. 2014. Contemporary Issues in Business
Ethics . Cengage Learning.
Dias, Priyan. 2020. “Review of Steps toward a Philosophy of Engineering:
Historico-philosophical and Critical Essays, by Carl Mitcham.” Prometheus
36 (4): 396-402. Accessed November 13, 2023. https://www.jstor.org/stable/
10.13169/prometheus.36.4.0396.
Downey, Gary Lee. 2015. “Opening Up Engineering Formation.” Engineering Stud-
ies7 (2-3): 217-20. doi: 10.1080/19378629.2015.1121612.
Du¨well, Marcus, and Gerhard Bos. 2016. “Human Rights and Future People—
Possibilities of Argumentation.” Journal of Human Rights 15 (2): 231-50. doi:
10.1080/14754835.2015.1118341.
Frey, William Joseph, Christopher Papadopoul os, Marcel J. Castro-Sitiriche, Fatima
Zevallos, and Denisse Echevarria. 2012. “On Integrating Appropriate Technology
Responsive to Community Capabilities: A Case Study from Haiti.” 2012 ASEE
Annual Conference & Exposition, 25.991.1 –25.991.17, San Antonio, TX. Accessed
November 13, 2023. https://peer.asee.org/o n-integrating-appr opriate-technolo
gy-responsive-to-community-capab ilities-a-case-study-from-haiti.
Fukuda-Parr, Sakiko. 2011. “The Metrics of Human Rights: Complementarities of
the Human Development and Capabilities Approach.” Journal of Human Devel-
opment and Capabilities 12 (1): 73-89. doi: 10.1080/19452829.2011.541750.926 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
Fukuda-Parr, Sakiko. 2013. “Human Rights and Politics in Development.”
InHuman Rights: Politics and Practice , edited by Michael Goodhart, 2nd ed.,
161-78. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fukuda-Parr, Sakiko, Terra Lawson-Remer, and Susan Randolph. 2015. Fulfilling
Social and Economic Rights , 1st ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gibney, Mark, and Peter Haschke. 2020. “Special Issue on Quantitative Human
Rights Measures.” Journal of Human Rights 19 (1): 1-2. doi: 10.1080/
14754835.2019.1684883.
Gong, Yuyang. 2010. “International Experience in Policy and Regulatory Frame-
works for Brownfield Site Management.” Sustainable Development—East Asia
and Pacific Region Discussion Papers, World Bank. Accessed November 13,
2023. http://documents.worldba nk.org/curated/en/105931468218106615/pdf/
578900ESW0P11910BOX353785B01PUBLIC1.pdf.
Good, Colleen. 2010. “Human Rights and Relativism.” Macalester Journal of
Philosophy 19 (1): 27-51.
Graham, R. 2018. “The Global State of the Art in Engineering Education.”
New Engineering Education Transformation . Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Accessed November 13, 2023. https://www.rhgraha
m.org/resources/Global-state-of-the-a rt-in-engineering-education—March-20
18.pdf.
Grunwald, A. 2000. Against over-estimating the role of ethics in technology devel-
opment. Science and Engineering Ethics . 6 (2): 181–196.
Grunwald, A. 2001. The application of ethics to engineering and the engineer’s
moral responsibility: Perspectives for a research agenda. Science and Engineer-
ing Ethics 7 (3): 415-428.
Harris, Charles E., Jr., Michael S. Pritchard, and Michael J. Rabins. 2009. Engi-
neering Ethics: Concepts and Cases , 4th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Health and Places Initiative. 2015. Mobility, Universal Design, Health, and Place .
Harvard Graduate School of Design. Accessed November 13, 2023. https://resea
rch.gsd.harvard.edu/hapi/files/2015/11/HAPI_ResearchBrief_UniversalDesign-
112315.pdf.
Herkert, Joseph R. 2001. “Future Directions in Engineering Ethics Research: Micro-
ethics, Macroethics and the Role of Professional Societies.” Science and Engi-
neering Ethics 7 (3): 403-14. doi: 10.1007/s11948-001-0062-2.
Hiskes, Richard P. 2008. The Human Right to a Green Future: Environmental
Rights and Intergenerational Justice . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511575396.
Hoole, Dushyanthi, and S. Ratnajeevan Hoole. 2002. “A Curriculum with Human
Rights in the Engineering Programme.” 2002 Annual Conference, 7.42.1–7.42.8,927 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
Montreal, Canada. Accessed November 13, 2023. https://peer.asee.org/a-curricu
lum-with-human-rights-in-the-engineering-programme.
Hunt, Paul. H., and Gillian MacNaughton. 2006. “Impact Assessments, Poverty and
Human Rights: A Case Study Using the Right to the Highest Attainable Standard
of Health.” Health and Human Rights Working Paper Series. Accessed Novem-
ber 13, 2023. https://repository.essex.ac.uk/9784/1/impact-assessments-poverty-
human-rights-report.pdf.
Kashwan, Prakash. 2018. Democracy in the Woods: Environmental Conservation
and Social Justice in India, Tanzania, and Mexico , Illustrated edition. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kaye, David. 2018. “Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and Pro-
tection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression.” A/73/348. United
Nations General Assembly. Accessed November 13, 2023. https://undocs.org/A/
73/348.
Kopnina, Helen. 2018. “Teaching Sustainable Development Goals in the Nether-
lands: A Critical Approach.” Environmental Education Research 24 (9):
1268-83. doi: 10.1080/13504622.2017.1303819.
Ladd, John. 1985. “Ethical Issues in the Use of Computers.” In Ethical Issues in the
Use of Computers , edited by Deborah G. Johnson and John W. Snapper, 8-13.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Land, Molly K. 2013. “Toward an International Law of the Internet.” Harvard
International Law Journal 54 (2): 393-458. Accessed November 13, 2023.
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Is sues/Opinion/Communications/MollyLa
nd.pdf.
Land, Molly K., and Jay D. Aronson. 2018. “The Promise and Peril of Human Rights
Technology.” In New Technologies for Human Rights Law and Practice , edited
by Jay D. Aronson and Molly K. Land, 1-20. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press. doi: 10.1017/9781316838952.001.
Leydens, Jon A., and Juan C. Lucena. 2014. “Social Justice: A Missing, Unelabo-
rated Dimension in Humanitarian Engineering and Learning through Service.”
International Journal for Service Learning in Engineering, Humanitarian Engi-
neering and Social Entrepreneurship 9 (2): 1-28. doi: 10.24908/ijsle.v9i2.5447.
Leydens, Jon A., and Juan C. Lucena. 2018. Engineering Justice: Transforming
Engineering Education and Practice , 1st ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-IEEE Press.
Luegenbiehl, Heinz C., and Rockwell F. Clancy. 2017. “Chapter 3—Engineering
Professionalism and Professional Organizations.” In Global Engineering Ethics ,
edited by Heinz C. Luegenbiehl and Rockwell F. Clancy, 33-52. Butterworth-
Heinemann. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-811218-2.00003-5.
Lynch, Daniel. 2004. “A Human Rights Challenge to the Engineering Profession.”
2004 Annual Conference, 9.48.1–9.48.9, Salt Lake City, UT. Accessed928 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
November 13, 2023. https://peer.asee.org/a-human-rights-challenge-to-the-engi
neering-profession.
Lynch, William T., and Ronald Kline. 2000. “Engineering Practice and Engineering
Ethics.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 25 (2): 195-225. doi: 10.1177/
016224390002500203.
Manion, M. 2002. “Ethics, Engineering, and Sustainable Development.” IEEE
Technology and Society Magazine 21 (3): 39-48. doi: 10.1109/MTAS.2002.
1035228.
Mace, Ron. 1985. “Universal design, barrier-free environments for everyone.” Los
Angeles: Designers West 33 (1): 147-152.
Martin, Mike W., and Roland Schinzinger. 2009. Introduction to Engineering
Ethics , 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math.
Meiksins, Peter. 1988. “The ‘Revolt of the Engineers’ Reconsidered.” Technology
and Culture 29 (2): 219-46. doi: 10.2307/3105524.
Meiksins, Peter, and Chris Smith. 1993. “Organizing Engineering Work: A Com-
parative Analysis.” Work and Occupations 20 (2): 123-46. doi: 10.1177/
0730888493020002001.
Miller, David. 1999. Principles of Social Justice . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press. Accessed November 13, 2023. https://www.hup.harvard.edu/cata
log.php?isbn ¼9780674007147.
Mitcham, Carl. 2009. “A Historico-ethical Perspective on Engineering Education:
From Use and Convenience to Policy Engagement.” Engineering Studies 1 (1):
35-53. doi: 10.1080/19378620902725166.
Mitcham, Carl, and David Mun ˜oz. 2010. “Humanitarian Engineering.” Synthesis
Lectures on Engineers, Technology, and Society 5 (1): 1-87. doi: 10.2200/
S00248ED1V01Y201006ETS012.
Moskal, Barbara, and Joan Gosink. 2007. “Humanitarian Engineering Curriculum:
Defining Student Learning Outcomes.” 2007 Annual Conference & Exposition,
12.815.1–12.815.7, Honolulu, HI. Accessed November 13, 2023. https://peer.a
see.org/humanitarian-engineering-curriculum-defining-student-learning-outcomes.
Mun˜oz, David R., and Carl Mitcham. 2012. “Chapter 3: Humanitarian Engineering.”
InConvergence: Philosophies and Pedagogies for Developing the Next Genera-
tion of Humanitarian Engineers and Social Entrepreneurs ,e d i t e db yT h o m a sH .
Colledge, 54-79. Boulder, CO: International Journal for Service Learning in
Engineering.
NAE (National Academy of Engineering). 1991. Engineering as a Social Enter-
prise . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/1829.
NAE (National Academy of Engineering). 2004. The Engineer of 2020: Visions of
Engineering in the New Century . Washington, DC: The National Academies
Press. doi: 10.17226/10999.929 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
NAE (National Academy of Engineering). 2017a. “NAE Grand Challenges for
Engineering.” Accessed November 13, 2023. https://www.nae.edu/173328/Wo
rkshop-on-Engineering-Student-Grand-Challenges-Competition.
NAE (National Academy of Engineering). 2017b, Spring. “Special Issue on Engi-
neering Ethics.” The Bridge . Accessed November 13, 2023. https://www.nae.e
du/168631/Spring-Issue-of-The-Bridge-on-Engineering-Ethics.
National Research Council. 2009. Engineering in K-12 Education: Understanding
the Status and Improving the Prospects . Washington DC: The National Acade-
mies Press. doi: 10.17226/12635.
Nickel, James. 2007. Making Sense of Human Rights , 2nd ed. Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell.
Nordic Trust Fund and the World Bank. 2013. Human Rights Impact Assessments: A
Review of the Literature, Differences with Other Forms of Assessment, and
Relevance for Development . Washington, DC: The World Bank. Accessed
November 13, 2023. http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/
834611524474505865/pdf/125557-WP-PUBLIC-HRIA-Web.pdf.
Obermeyer, Ziad, Brian Powers, Christine Vogeli, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2019.
“Dissecting Racial Bias in an Algorithm Used to Manage the Health of Popula-
tions.” Science . 366 (6464): 447-53. doi: 10.1126/science.aax2342.
OHCHR (The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights).
2012. Human Rights Indicators: A Guide to Measurement and Implementation .
United Nations. doi: 10.18356/58576336-en.
Oosterlaken, I. 2009. “Design for Development: A Capability Approach.” Design
Issues , 25(4), 2009. Accessed November 13, 2023. https://repository.tudelft.nl/i
slandora/object/uuid %3A1e874956-706a-4a89-9814-027ff876edc7.
Ram´ırez-Mendoza, Ricardo A., Ruben Morales-Menendez, Elda M. Melchor-Martinez,
Hafiz M. N. Iqbal, Lizeth Parra-Arroyo, Adriana Vargas-Mart´ ınez, and Roberto
Parra-Saldivar. 2020. “Incorporatin g the Sustainable Development Goals in
Engineering Education.” International Journal on Interactive Design and
Manufacturing (IJIDeM) 14 (3): 739-45. doi: 10.1007/s12008-020-00661-0.
Riley, Donna. 2008. “Engineering and Social Justice.” Synthesis Lectures
on Engineers, Technology, and Society 3 (1): 1-152. doi: 10.2200/
S00117ED1V01Y200805ETS007.
Robeyns, Ingrid, and Morten Fibieg er Byskov. 2021, Fall. “The Capability
Approach.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , edited by Edward N.
Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Accessed November 13,
2023. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2021/entries/capability-approach/.
Rodr´ ıguez-Garavito, C´ esar. Forthcoming. Litigaing the Climate Emergency: How
Human Rights, Courts, and Legal Mobilization Can Bolster Climate Action .
New York: Cambridge University Press.930 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
Sachs, Jeffrey D. 2015. The Age of Sustainable Development . New York: Columbia
University Press.
Sano, Hans-Otto, and Jakob Kirkemann Hansen. 2006. “The Implications and Value
Added of a Rights-based Approach.” In Development as a Human Right: Legal,
Political, and Economic Dimensions , edited by Ba ˚rd A. Andreassen and Stephen
P. Marks. A Nobel Symposium Book, Nobel Symposium 125. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Sen, Amartya. 1999. Development as Freedom . Reprint ed. New York: Anchor.
Sen, Amartya. 2004. “Elements of a Theory of Human Rights.” Philosophy &
Public Affairs 32 (4): 315-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1088-4963.2004.00017.x.
Sen, Amartya. 2005. “Human Rights and Capabilities.” Journal of Human Devel-
opment 6 (2): 151-66. doi: 10.1080/14649880500120491.
Smith, Jessica M., and Juan C. Lucena. 2020. “Socially Responsible Engineering.”
InThe Routledge Handbook of the Philosophy of Engineering , edited by Diane P.
Michelfelder, Neelke Doorn New York: Routledge. 661-673.
Social Exclusion Unit. 2003. Making the Connections: Final Report on Transport
and Social Exclusion . Accessed November 13, 2023. https://www.ilo.org/
wcmsp5/groups/public/—ed_emp/—emp_ policy/—invest/documents/publica
tion/wcms_asist_8210.pdf.
The World Bank. 2019. Social Inclusion . The World Bank. Accessed November 13,
2023. https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/social-inclusion.
Tranquillo, J. 2018. “Sustainable Development Challenge for BME.” 2018 ASEE
Annual Conference & Exposition, Salt Lake City, UT. doi: 10.18260/1-2–31038.
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2016. Report on the World Social
Situation 2016: Leaving No One Behind: The Imperative of Inclusive Develop-
ment . United Nations. doi: 10.18356/5aa151e0-en.
UNDP (United Nations Development Program). 2019. “Human Rights-based
Approach.” Accessed November 13, 2023. https://unsdg.un.org/2030-agenda/u
niversal-values/human-rights-based-approach.
UNESCO. 2021. Engineering for sustainable development: delivering on the Sus-
tainable Development Goals. Paris, France: United Nations Educational, Scien-
tific and Cultural Organization. Accessed November 13, 2023. https://unesdoc.u
nesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000375644?pos InSet=1&queryId=103fa986-0981-
4bf5-ac64-920440a06dbf.
United Nations. 1948. Universal Declaration of Human Rights . Retrieved Novem-
ber 13, 2023, from https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-hu
man-rights.
United Nations Sustainable Development Group. 2003. The Human Rights-based
Approach to Development Cooperatio n towards a Common Understanding
among UN Agencies . United Nations. Accessed November 13, 2023. https://u931 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
nsdg.un.org/sites/default/files/6959-The_Human_Rights_Based_Approach_
to_Development_Cooperation_Towar ds_a_Common_Understanding_among_
UN.pdf.
US DOT. 2012, August. “NEPA Regulatory Framework and Process | Public Invol-
vement.” Accessed November 13, 2023. https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/federal-aide
ssentials/companionresources/42publibinv.pdf.
US EPA. 2015, September 30. “Superfund Redevelopment Videos | Eagle Rock
Lake Restoration.” Overviews and Factsheets. US EPA. Accessed November 13,
2023. https://www.epa.gov/superfund-redevelopment-initiative/superfund-rede
velopment-videos#eagle.
US EPA. 2017. “Population Surrounding 1,836 Superfund Remedial Sites.”
Accessed November 13, 2023. https://www .epa.gov/sites/production/files/20
15-09/documents/webpopulationrsuperfundsites9.28.15.pdf.
US EPA. 2020. “EPA Year in Review.” Newsroom. US EPA. Accessed November
13, 2023. https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2021-01/documents/hq_2020_
year_in_review.pdf.
van de Poel, Ibo, and A. C. van Gorp. 2006. “The Need for Ethical Reflection in
Engineering Design: The Relevance of Type of Design and Design Hierarchy.”
Science, Technology, & Human Values 31 (3): 333-60. doi:10.1177/
0162243905285846.
Vesilind, P. Aarne, and Alastair S. Gunn. 1998. Engineering, Ethics, and the Envi-
ronment . New York: Cambridge University Press.
Winkler, Inga T., and Carmel Williams. 2017. “The Sustainable Development Goals
and Human Rights: A Critical Early Review.” The International Journal of
Human Rights 21 (8): 1023-28. doi: 10.1080/13642987.2017.1348695.
Winner, Langdon. 1990. “Engineering ethics and political imagination.” Broad and
narrow interpretations of philosophy of technology . 53-64.
World Health Organization. 2019. Social Exclusion . Social Determinants of Health.
Accessed November 13, 2023. http://www.who.int/social_determinants/themes/
socialexclusion/en/.
Wyndham, Jessica M., and Theresa Harris . 2014. “Introduction: Science, Tech-
nology and Human Rights: Lessons Learned from the Right to Water and
Sanitation.” Science and Engineering Ethics 20 (4): 827-31. doi: 10.1007/
s11948-014-9515-2.
Zalasiewicz, Jan, Mark Williams, Will Steffen, and Paul Crutzen. 2010. “The New
World of the Anthropocene.” Environmental Science & Technology 44 (7):
2228-31. doi: 10.1021/es903118j.
Zandvoort, H., I. Van de Poel, and M. Brumsen. 2000. “Ethics in the Engineering
Curricula: Topics, Trends and Challenges for the Future.” European Journal of
Engineering Education 25 (4): 291-302. doi: 10.1080/03043790050200331.932 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
Author Biographies
Davis Chacon Hurtado is an Assistant Research Professor in the Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering and the Gladstein Family Human Rights
Institute at the University of Connecticut. He holds a Ph.D. in Transportation and
Infrastructure Systems from Purdue University; MSCE degree from the University
of Puerto Rico at Mayagu ¨ez; and B.S. in civil engineering from University of San
Antonio Abad of Cusco (Per ´u). His research interests include the evaluation of
transportation systems; transportation planning; economic resilience; environmental
justice, equity, and human rights; GIS-based spatial analysis; and sustainable trans-
portation planning in developing countries.
Kazem Kazerounian is Dean of the UConn College of Engineering at the Univer-
sity of Connecticut and Professor of Mechanical Engineering. He holds MS. and
Ph.D. degrees in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Illinois at Chicago.
His expertise is in analytical and computational kinematics and dynamics applied in
diverse applications and as Dean he has led strategic initiatives for the College of
Engineering aimed at expanding its research, enterprise, institutional advancement,
technology commercialization, and educational innovation.
Shareen Hertel is the Wiktor Osiatyn ´ski Chair of Human Rights & Professor of
Political Science at the University of Connecticut. Hertel holds her doctorate in
political science and dual master’s degrees from Columbia University, and a B.A.
in international relations from The College of Wooster (Ohio). Her research focuses
on changes in transnational human rights advocacy with a focus on labor and
economic rights issues, drawing on her professional experience with foundations,
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and United Nations agencies in the United
States, Latin America and South Asia.
Jonathan Mellor is Assistant Teaching Professor and Co-Chair of Civil and Envi-
ronmental Engineering at University of Massachusetts Dartmouth. He holds a BS in
Physics from The College of William and Mary; an MS in Physics from the Uni-
versity of Virginia; an MS in Environmental Engineering from Michigan Techno-
logical University; and a Doctorate in Civil Engineering from the University of
Virginia. His expertise in hydrology and water resources extends across multiple
fields and applications, including climate resiliency, sustainability and life-cycle
analysis, and water and health in developing regions.
Jack J. Barry is a Postdoctoral Research Associate in the Center for Public Interest
Communications at the University of Florida. Barry received his Ph.D. in political
science from the University of Connecticut, and his MA in political science from the
University of Rhode Island. His areas of research focus on the impact of Information
Communication Technologies on developm ent, poverty, and politics, and also
investigating access to the internet as a new emergent human right.933 Chacon-Hurtado et al.
Tulasi Ravindran is a doctoral candidate in Civil, Architectural and Environmental
Engineering at the University of Texas at Austin. She is currently researching the
recovery of selenium as a resource from biological treatment of selenium laden
wastewater. She graduated from BITS Pilani KK Birla, Goa Campus in India with
a double major in chemistry and chemical engineering and received her MS in
Chemical Engineering from the University of Connecticut.934 Science,Technology,&HumanValues499(4)999
